---
layout: subpage
title: Confucian Ethics
image: css/confucius.png
subpage: true
coursepage: false
---

## “If you try to guide the common people with coercive regulations and keep them in line with punishments, the common people will become evasive and will have no sense of shame. If, however, you guide them with Virtue, and keep them in line by means of ritual, the people will have a sense of shame and will rectify themselves.”
### ― Confucius, *The Analects*

# _Confucian Ethics_
### __Purpose__
Confucian Ethics emphasize a focus on the relationships between human beings. It is an ethics of virtue that believes in the importance defining virtues and principles in relation to one another. Through Confucian Ethics, it is believed that one achieves the fullest personhood by marking their relationships with mutual care and respect. In summary, Confucianism is based entirely on kindness, mutual respect, and an appreciation for character virtues. It is founded on the belief that a society can only find success when people learn to interact positively with one another. Based on this short summary, an action would be considered ethical through the lens of Confucian Ethics if it focused on positively impacting the relationship between individuals involved with both parties acting with kindness and a mutual respect for one another. For example, if an employee were to make a mistake while working on a project the response for their boss would not be one of anger resulting in punishment. In order to align with Confucian Ethics, the boss would help their employee understand the problem and how to fix it without the need for punishment, as this would have a negative impact on their established relationship.
### __Are ethics necessary?__
The social philosophy of Confucianism is based in acting with ren, or compassion in relation to others. This in and of itself shows the predisposition to act ethically, specifically in relation to other human beings, as the very basis of their belief system. This is further represented by the Golden Rule of Confucianism: “What you do not wish for yourself, do not do to others”. Confucius argues that humans are responsible for their own actions and especially for their treatment of others. In addition to this, one of the core concepts of Confucianism is that of the relationship between junzi and dao. Junzi represents someone who is of “ethical nobility” or the ideal virtuous and ethical person. A way in which a person can attain this ethical nobility is to follow the dao, or the way human beings should live their lives.  
In conclusion, those who follow Confucianism are predisposed to act ethically for two main reasons: they understand the importance of relationships with others and social order so Confucianists will act ethically in relation to other humans in order to keep this social order in balance. Additionally, the core concept of the relationship between junzi and dao give Confucianists a more direct way of leading an ethical life in order to become a person of ethical nobility. “The junzi is the ethical exemplar with the virtues making it possible to follow the dao.” (from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-chinese/#VirEthDaoJunRen)
### __Human Computer Interaction & AI__
A large focus of Confucian ethics is on human relationships and using virtue as a guide in these. In response to this, this ethical framework would likely focus largely on the various aspects of computer technology that affect how humans interact and form relationships, both in good and bad ways. This can appear in various ways, from the ease of global communication, to the ability to act anonymously, and further to the idea how virtue can connect with artificial intelligence. One impact that would likely be a polarizing topic is simply how humans are able to communicate with one another. Computer technology has allowed people to stay in touch with friends and family all over the globe. We are able to see and share in happy and sad moments from across the country, which allows relationships to foster mutual care and respect, even when not in close proximity. On the other hand, computer technology has changed how humans interact and form relationships in regular life. It can act as a distraction and prevent a caring relationship from being formed, and while it may not directly cause one to act without virtue, it may inhibit them from living out their life to the degree they should, as the concept of dao states. In a more direct opposition, the anonymity of the internet has led to people acting with no compassion for others, and created a platform for expression that directly opposes Confucian beliefs. On a different note, another concept that Confucian ethics would likely consider would be the advancement of artificial intelligence, and how virtue and relationships are changed or implemented when a non-human thing is present. While it is likely that the approach would remain largely unchanged, questions would be raised over whether artificial intelligence can participate in mutual care and compassion with a human.
### __Confucian Ethics & IEEE__
##### *Similarities*
Both the IEEE code of ethics and the Confucian Ethics appear to be a collection of values which are held to be aspirational rather than consequences of a single unifying principle. Furthermore, both the IEEE code of ethics and the Confucian Ethics are very concerned with an individual's relationships with those around them; the IEEE code of ethics has parts about how to act in relation to colleagues, customers, and the public at large that are all slightly different. Lastly, both the IEEE code of ethics and the Confucian Ethics are flexible with regard to people all being slightly different and having different needs and abilities. The IEEE code of ethics point 6 specifically acknowledges that one should act essentially to the best of their ability and the Confucian Ethics has different suggestions for different people such as whether or not to confront your elders when they are apparently wrong.
##### *Differences*
First, the IEEE code of ethics and the Confucian Ethics differ in how they inform one’s actions. Whereas, the Confucian Ethics consists of values that are aspirational and leaves it to the individual to decide how to act such that they have those values, the IEEE code of ethics explicitly describes what one should do. For example, the IEEE code of ethics explicitly says to reject bribery whereas the Confucian Ethics would suggest that to be honest is aspirational and leave it to the individual that, that includes rejecting bribery. Additionally, the IEEE code of ethics and the Confucian Ethics differ slightly in how the recommendations that they make about interacting with different people. The IEEE code of ethics states that one should not discriminate based on a host of attributes (point 8), which is to say that one should not change how one behaves with other people based on those attributes. It does not appear that the Confucian Ethics would agree with this approach since a core part of it is that one should have different values based on the person that they are interacting with. That is not to say that Confucian Ethics would necessarily result in one treating others worse based on those attributes but perhaps differently which the IEEE code of ethics condemns.
##### *Lessons*
The Confucian Ethics would add to the IEEE code of ethics by introducing at the least a reason for behaving in the way that it describes. That is the IEEE code of ethics provides no underlying reason for behaving in the way that it describes (perhaps because it is believed to be self evident) and that is something that the aspiriational values in the Confucian Ethics could provide.
### __Confucian Ethics & ACM__
##### *Similarities*
Both the ACM code of ethics and Confucian Ethics share a central theme of setting guidelines towards being virtuous person, both in personal life and daily work. The first code of ACM members is that they will “contribute to society and human well-being” and in Confucian Ethics the ideal of junzi embodies ethical nobility. With junzi comes respect for social forms of conduct and the ability to discern what is right in any situation. This same belief is consistent through the ACM code of ethics through codes such as, “be honest and trustworthy”, “honor confidentiality”, and “respect existing laws pertaining to professional work”.
##### *Differences*
The ACM is much more structured than Confucian Ethics. In Confucian Ethics correct behavior is defined through virtue. The virtue itself comes from Confucius's teachings on the ideals of junzi, dao, ren, and li, saying that when one strives to embody these virtues they reach a full state of ren, or “personal ethicalness”. The ACM structures itself in two ways, one by separating teachings between “code” and “guidelines” and two by separating the code of ethics into four sections with importance placed on specific members depending on the section. The “code” are statements intended to be followed by all members and embody the general beliefs of the ACM, as it’s not designed to frequently change. In ACM, these codes are present as much more direct statements of what to follow than the ideals of virtue presented in Confucian Ethics. The ACM also sets a framework for termination of membership when its principles are not upheld.
##### *Lessons*
Confucian Ethics could greatly add to the guidelines in the ACM code of ethics by introducing the notion of virtue as a reason for acting in an ethical way. For example, code 2.5 states to get full analysis, including risk, of your system to the public. The guideline goes on to give reasons such as “you’re in a position of public trust”. If there were emphasized through concepts like Dao then each code would have one overarching theme of virtue as guidance as well.
### __Confucian Ethics & ICCP__
##### *Similarities*
A major aspect of Confucian Ethics is the idea of having a life full relationships built on mutual care and respect. There are a few subsections in the ICCP Code of Ethics that directly relate to this. For example, the ICCP code stresses both accepting and providing reviews of your work and others work (2.4) and the creation of opportunities for people around you to learn and grow as professionals (3.5). Both of these tenets of ICCP would promote learning opportunities that allow the workers to better themselves and their skills, which is the same method that Confucian Ethics would take to address problems and build relationships. In addition, the ICCP ethics mention the importance of being honest and trustworthy (1.3) and being fair and not discriminating (1.4). Both of these are virtuous actions that would strengthen your relationships due to the respect it would show.
##### *Differences*
The ICCP code of ethics seem to put a strong emphasis on performing public good. In fact, the very first tenet it mentions (1.1) is “Contribute to society and human well-being.” It also mentions “foster public awareness” (2.7),  and “ensure that public good is the central concern” (3.1). While Confucian Ethics do have a major emphasis on acting virtuous, it doesn’t explicitly specify that it has to be for the public as opposed to how you carry yourself and your interactions with others.
##### *Lessons*
ICCP’s code makes references to the workplace, such as providing and receiving reviews and being a team member, but it doesn’t really talk about maintaining social order. Confucian ethics make mention of respecting the position of those around you and maintaining social order, so by adding a tenet into the ICCP code, then one could specify the importance of working in a team and respecting those around you, which fits in with the respect and trustworthiness already mentioned in 1.3.

###H-1B Visa System
#### *In Favor Of*
One of the most common arguments in favor of the H-1B system is that it brings the needed skill sets to America. It’s the idea that, if someone overseas is qualified and could really contribute to a project or team, then America should gladly bring them over to help better the product, team composition, etc. It’s written that “the program brings needed skills into the labor market, which helps firms remain innovative, productive, and competitive” (HBR). There’s also the fact that the technical fields are booming - “The number of young Americans graduating with qualifications in IT subjects is rising, but nowhere near fast enough to satisfy the burgeoning demand for their skills” (HBR). This implies that due to the shortage in the field, it’s in our best interest to seek out the talent we need, and if that comes from outside the USA, then to sponsor them so that we can get these talented individuals working on our products. Furthermore, bringing in people from foreign countries expands the viewpoints present on the team and in the workforce. They can bring all sorts of unique perspectives to problems and the workplace as they come from all sorts of ethic, cultural, socioeconomic, etc backgrounds compared to the current more white and male dominated tech workforce.
#### *In Opposition Of*
IEEE-USA posted an article explaining that the main reason they’re opposed to the H-1B visa system isn’t because they don’t want to bring talented people in, but because there are many companies (specifically outsourcing ones) that abuse the system to bring in talented workers and then not compensate them properly. They write, “It is a tool used by companies to avoid hiring American workers, and avoid paying American wages” (IEEE). They argue that the green card program is the one that’s fairer and should be expanded. It’s also a hard process for companies to obtain these visas (hard enough that “members of the tech industry have lobbied Congress to raise the cap on H-1B visas to help meet demand,” including Bill Gates in 2008 (HBR)). Meanwhile, about a third of the 85,000 visas went to 13 outsourcing companies. There have also been numerous studies done that show that the H-1B program has negative effects on American workers in general, including but not limited to displacement and lower earnings. It’s argued that this system brings cheaper foreign labor into America, and in doing so, “hurts American workers’ employment and income prospects” (HBR). Building off of those, Trump and his administration have placed further scrutiny on the program, signing an executive order titled “Buy American and Hire American” which, as you can guess, places an emphasis on prioritizing American products and workers.
Source for all quotes except the first one: https://hbr.org/2017/05/the-h-1b-visa-debate-explained 
#### *In response to the controversy*
Confucian Ethics frames itself around the three concepts: junzi, dao, and ren. Junzi refers to striving for ethical nobility through traits of virtue. Dao refers to the life path people should follow when they embody junzi. Ren then is the fulfilment of these concepts and describes that ethical excellence comes from living according to your personal dao by following junzi. An important caveat is that ren comes from the individual, rather than others, and that although dao is the guidelines for how humans should live, it also acknowledges that individuals have unique life paths. Junzi promotes harmony so it would largely be in favor of the service that H-1B provides. Confucian Ethics would empower employers to hire from outside their culture in order to encourage diverse ideas, promoting the growth of the company, and empower foreign workers to accept the best opportunity they can obtain in order to do what is best for their own life path. Confucian Ethics focus largely on improving the individual so any initiative that provides economic opportunity to individuals who wouldn’t have it otherwise would be seen as virtuous. However Confucian Ethics would also discourage the actions of outsourcing companies for how their choice to underpay their workers doesn’t follow junzi. Employers should treat their employees with the same respect as family because of how connected each worker’s dao is connected to one another, solely based on the amount of time humans spend working if nothing else. When H-1B works it empowers individuals to act in a way that betters their life. Companies gain diverse and developed skill sets, promoting the growth and well being of the company allowing it to have the means to provide the best service it can. Workers are given the means to provide for their families and drastically change their life situation. Even in the case of outsourcing companies who abuse this system, Confucian Ethics would still support the actions of the workers who accept these jobs because they do so to follow their own dao. The problem arises when these outsourcing companies place their workers in a position where they don’t have the means to meet a standard of living. While Confucianism embodies concern for oneself, it also claims this should be centered around a concern for everyone. When these outsourcing companies try to acquire as much cheap labor as possible in order to gain their own economic advantage they aren’t following junzi. Worse than hurting their own workers, they also steal opportunity from other workers applying for the H-1B visa that would otherwise be able to follow their dao. For this reason Confucian Ethics would support the IEEE’s stance to improve the green card process because it promotes the growth of junzi and dao that the H-1B visa provides by extending it to a wider group of people. Confucian Ethics doesn’t discriminate who can reach ren and better a society based on skill so providing opportunity to even the less-educated public would be an action of junzi. 

###Google Internal Memo
#### *Summary*
The Google internal memo discusses the author’s reasoning for why there exists a gender bias/gap at Google and in the tech industry as a whole. It is known that a male employee wrote the memo and he states that women are not underrepresented in tech because of an underlying bias and discrimination against them but because of inherent psychological differences between men and women. Essentially, he is arguing that there is no discrimination against women in tech, they just do not have the biological makings to succeed in the industry. He follows this argument up by stating “we need to stop assuming that gender gaps imply sexism”, echoing his belief that the industry is not discriminatory. He also discusses the idea of moral bias as a category of bias that is not acknowledged at Google, but that deeply impacts the work atmosphere. He splits the biases into left and right political biases that impact the culture at Google. He acknowledges that neither side is 100% correct in their beliefs but that the left bias creates a politically correct culture in which dissenters are shamed into silence. This left bias is the reason, he argues, that many Google employees do not speak up about the gender gap not being caused by sexism. He states that other fellow employees share his same viewpoint but do not have the courage to share their thoughts thus creating an ideological echo chamber, which is the title of the memo.
#### *Validity*
One of the main aspects in the memo which Confucianism would find valid is where the author states that some of the diversity programs and classes that are meant to be more inclusive actually increase discrimination because they are only meant for some genders and races. In this way, Confucianism would say that the people implementing these programs should only do so if they would want them to be that way for everyone, in all circumstances. People should only take a certain action if that action is what they would want for the general population, not just a subset. 
In a similar manner, the author discusses how those who lean right often feel like they cannot share their opinions openly because they will face hostility from the left as a result. In the manner of Confucianism, in cases where this would be true, those on the left should only be hostile toward those on the right for sharing their opinions if they would also be okay with those on the right being hostile back at them. Otherwise, those at any point on the political spectrum should be receptive to other ideas and willing to discuss them if that is also what they would want for themselves. 
#### *Invalidity*
One main area where the memo would not be in line with Confucianism is where the author talks about men getting ahead in leadership roles more often than women because they are more dedicated to achieving status than women. This is a very individualistic approach to the topic, and regardless of its truth or lack thereof, Confucianism strongly emphasizes the family over the individual, and while this often refers to one’s actual blood-related family, it can also be interpreted to mean a company atmosphere and those who one works with in an industry. Following Confucianism, the focus would not be so much on increasing individual success alone, but to help others achieve similar success while achieving it individually at the same time. 

###Gender Bias in Tech
#### *Summary of Gender Issues*
As was discussed in the article “Why is Silicon Valley So Awful to Women?”, of all of the computing and mathematical jobs in the US, only about a quarter of those positions are held by women. They cited a few different reasons for what has caused this. We will discuss a few below: 
Undermining: Women often cite experiences with men doubting their abilities, diminishing their accomplishments and experience in the field, or interrupting then during a meeting as examples of undermining they have experienced. This leads to a gradual chipping away of women’s confidence and willingness to put their voice out there or even lead to women leaving tech altogether. 
Hostility: Many women also discuss sexist experiences and the effect this has on their workplace environment and willingness to stay in tech. In a completely male-dominated field, these issues are more prevalent and women are told they should develop “thicker skin.” A hostile work environment is not productive for anyone involved.
There are certainly more reasons for the disparity of men in tech versus women in tech (a lack of role models and superiors to look up to, for example) but this undermining and hostility are certainly two of the most cited examples for why women leave a career in tech or don’t even pursue a career in tech in the first place. 
#### *Response to Issues*
As is described in the article, The Issue of Gender Equality in Confucian Culture1, Confucianism places a large focus on looking at people as their position in a relationship, rather than as an individual person. So a woman is seen as a mother or a wife, not as a unique person. In this role, she is expected to act how a mother should, and care for and educate the family. For this reason, Confucianism has been seen to prolong stereotypical gender roles, and actually acts in certain ways to support the issues mentioned above. In response to the idea of women being undermined in the tech industry, Confucianism likely promotes beliefs that are somewhat in line with this. Leadership roles tend to be seen as being for men, and thus women in these roles may not be taken seriously. With the idea of hostility towards women in tech, Confucian beliefs would most likely oppose these ideas. While they do believe that people should act in the role of their relationship, they also believe that one should act with virtue. So hostility towards women would likely not be supported, but may be unintentionally provoked through the expected gender roles. For the same reason, Confucian beliefs are likely in line with the reason why there are fewer role models for women in tech than men, as the expected Confucian roles for women in society are not in line with these positions. 

###Ethnicity Bias in Tech
#### *Summary*
As discussed in the articles that we read and most notably in “Addressing Ethnic Diversity in Computer Science” the primary issue with regard to race in ethnicity in computer science is that minorities are very underrepresented and this is due to two phenomenons:
Stereotype: Typically harmful stereotypes in computer science prevent minorities from participating in computer science in two ways. First, stereotypes about who computer scientists are (such as that computer science is the realm of only men and only white and asian men at that) discourages people who do not meet that criteria from participating in computer science. That is, if someone does not see themselves in the stereotypical computer scientist then they will be less likely to pursue computer science and less likely to stick at it if the stereotype is proved to be true. Second, negative stereotypes about certain minority groups often lead people that belong to that group to believe that they are somehow especially unqualified or less qualified than their peers when it comes to computer science. This also leads to fewer people from minority groups pursuing computer science because it introduces self-doubt about one’s capability to pursue computer science. This aspect of stereotypes are also especially harmful in the sense that they are widely believed why among various minority groups there is a high rate of people who stop studying computer science. 
Isolation: This is related to stereotype and oftentimes works in tandem to dissuade people from minority groups from pursuing computer science but is slightly different. Isolation refers to the phenomenon that people from minority groups even if they earn a degree in computer science and find a job working in the field are often one of if not the only minority. This of course has the effect of creating the perception of hostility or lack of inclusiveness in their workplace or university which leads to fewer people from minority groups pursuing computer science. 
### *Response to Issues*
It is not immediately clear what Confucian ethics would say about the situation of a lack of diversity in computer science as the ethics does not say anything explicitly about this. However, there are two big things from the ethics that can be applied to this situation. First, Confucian ethics has a heavy emphasis on the relationships that people have with people around them so a Confucian would probably hold that individuals should make an attempt to make people from minority groups feel welcome in their workplace or university. Second, Confucian ethics also holds that often different advice should be given to different people based on their situation and in this vein a Confucian would probably hold that someone like a manager or someone who hires people holds a greater responsibility and requires different virtues to address this situation. For example, they may be required to be more diplomatic because they are expected by the nature of their position to resolve any conflicts that occur between the people that report to them.
### __Corporate Responsibility in Technology__
One major issue in tech corporate ethical responsibility right now is taking stances on social and political issues. In today’s society, users of services, be it Twitter, Facebook, other social media and tech, retail, etc, want companies to take stands on issues - but they don’t want them to be disingenuous or hollow stands (an example being the backlash Twitter got when it ran an ad promoting women empowerment despite having a notoriously toxic community with harassment issues that it hasn’t fully figured out how to tackle). The intentions are there, but the actions aren’t. Likewise, many people see the stances being taken as merely being branding opportunities, and the argument over the true intentions behind the corporation’s stances becomes debated and can bring all sorts of good or bad press. Another major issue in corporate ethical responsibility right now is the collection and tracking of users and their data. Facebook is notorious for their recent scandal on data collection, but they’re just a drop in the bucket when it comes to this issue. Every major website and app tracks your usage not just on that service, but also in general, putting cookies on your computer and phone that track your browsing history, app usage, location, search history, and more. I’m sure we’ve all noticed times where we google something one time on our computer, and the next day it shows up as an ad on our Instagram feed - one small example of this. To some extent, it makes our lives easier, but the extreme invasion of privacy, which many of the users may be unaware of, is not something that these companies communicate well enough. Further, many companies sell this data to third parties, where it is further analyzed and stored for extended periods. This data is used to create a “persona” for everyone - but then the question arises as to whether it’s ethical to collect and sell our personal data. A third major issue being faced in tech now is over-curation or lack of intervention. By the over-curation, I mean changing the way content is delivered in a way to meet their own agenda rather than necessarily focusing on what users want. For example, Facebook is currently prioritizing videos over pictures and posts, and many of these videos are sponsored. Users may not care about this as much as their friend’s posts, but they’re still forced to see them. Twitter and Instagram caught flak for changing the way the feeds are organized (no longer chronologically, now sorted by some hidden algorithm), and Youtube has also gotten a lot of bad press for a similar issue. The second point (lack of intervention) is the more pressing one right now, and involves companies not stepping up and making statements or addressing problems. Some examples of that include Russia interfering with the 2016 Presidential Election (Twitter, Facebook) and no action being taken, major harassment on big platforms (Twitter, Facebook), the increase of fake news, and other similar detrimental content. This is spreading, and though the companies are aware of it, they haven’t done much to stop it yet.

### __Facebook's Nontransparent Data Policy__
#### *Description*
Facebook’s data collection has long been only subject to their own privacy standards, due to lack of any jurisdiction regarding data in the United States. In 2010, the Federal Trade Commision became concerned with how Facebook managed user personal data, especially when they found that it was shared with third-parties. They were largely concerned that Facebook had no oversight in how any developer may use the data provided by Facebook. This led to a consent order where Facebook agreed to identify risks to personal privacy and fix any issues found. However it appears that the desire for monetizing personal data and company growth overshadowed company resources to act on potential risks. Facebook claimed publicly that they had large teams working on privacy issues, but insiders such as Sandy Parakilas describe a setting where he led a very small privacy team and was ignored by top executives. The main fear was that open access to personal data makes people targets for manipulation, ranging from what they buy to their political views.
Nations such as Egypt and Ukraine have seem movements where data from Facebook was used to fuel revolution and political resistance, including through the means of fake news. Facebook was aware of this, but also didn’t chose acknowledge it to the public. When confronted by Ukrainian representatives they claimed that Facebook is an open platform. So users are able to post what they like. This allowed them to avoid claiming responsibility for the fact that along with targeting specific groups, paid promotions within Facebook were promoting the spread of fake news.
Facebook didn’t face any significant social outcry in the United States until 2018, when the influence of the misuse of data was attributed to the most recent presidential election. The New York Times broke a story that Cambridge Analytica collected 87 million profiles that were used to target users with “pro-Trump” advertising. Another New York Times report claimed that Facebook maintained a partnership with Apple, Amazon, BlackBerry, Microsoft, and Samsung allowing the products they create to obtain data about the Facebook friends of their users, even if those friends have requested not to share their data with third parties. Facebook responded by saying that it was necessary to meet demand and they planned to discontinue their APIs providing certain information. (Source 1: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T48KFiHwexM, Source 2: https://www.techrepublic.com/article/facebook-data-privacy-scandal-a-cheat-sheet/)
### *Confucian Interpretation*
These actions by Facebook were unethical largely because they had no official oversight other than themselves. A core belief of Confucianism is that a person should only take an action if he or she would be okay with anyone else taking that same action. In this situation, the same principle applies to Facebook as a company. If they had no reason to hide any of their private data collection actions and if they would be okay with other companies doing the same thing to them (i.e. taking their data and selling it to third-parties), then they should have sought oversight from an official source. Since they acted on this practice without seeking permission or input from Facebook users, and since they only may or may not have been okay with other companies performing these actions on them in return, their actions were unethical according to this major tenet of Confucianism.

On a similar note, another main belief of Confucianism is that every action affects someone else. Facebook employees must have known that this use of users’ personal data had the potential to affect them all in one way or another, but did they really think about how badly a small piece of negative information could affect someone if it was leaked as a direct result of their data collection and selling? As the summary of the issue above states, some of the information collected and sold was politically oriented, which, in today’s heated and divided political climate, can have serious consequences if that information falls into the wrong hands. This is another reason these actions taken by Facebook were unethical: they knew that they would affect their users, but they did not take the necessary steps to prevent that from happening.
### *Confucian Course of Action*
The framework of Confucian ethics is tailored to specific situations, so I would first like to note that this conclusion on how the corporation may have acted ethically in the situation is specific to Facebook. In our framework presentation, we discussed the fact that Confucius would sometimes offer conflicting advice to different students facing the same problem. This was because he understood that each student was a unique individual and took that into account when offering them advice and guidance. This is the same principle that guides our opinions for improvement when it comes to different corporations.

Now that the issues with Facebook’s privacy policy have come to light and are widely known by the public, the only thing that the company can do is to ensure that this does not happen again. One of the core values found within Confucian ethics is a distaste for punishment, as that is not believed to truly correct the issue. The course of action here, from the viewpoint of Confucian ethics, would be for someone to sit down the the top executives of Facebook (preferably someone neutral who is not involved with the company) that can help them understand why their actions were unethical and how they can take steps to improve in the future. This could become a corporation wide learning experience where all employees are required to attend a seminar (similar to what the executives had to do) in order to become more informed on the matter.

Due to the fact that the above suggestion is something that could be done after the unethical action has already taken place, it would have been more beneficial for Facebook to have already had a privacy expert on staff that could have been informing executives and employees on the potential conflicts within their privacy policy. This way, employees within the corporation would have been aware of any issues and could have attempted to correct them. It has been stated that a person should only take action if they would be okay with anyone else taking that same action so if we are truly trying to align with Confucian ethics an employee would say something if they believed the action did not align with this belief. It has also been state that one individual’s actions impact everyone else so if we are looking through this lens it would be in an employees best interest to report any unethical actions they may be aware of.
The biggest theme here is ensuring that everyone within the corporation, from the executives to the newest of employees, are informed of what is happening so they have the ability to respond in an ethical manner.

### __Solving Unethical Corporate Behavior__
##### *Ban Tracking and Recording of Data*
Because of the huge insecurity and uncertainty that people are feeling today due to the tracking, recording, and use of their data by big companies, the simple solution would be to ban this action completely. This is definitely something that these companies would not support, as they are able to use this data to direct advertisements and suggest content the user may be interested in. The companies would take a big hit, but if they value the security of their users it would potentially be a step in the right direction. If there was a way to record and use data that did not encroach on the users’ privacy, this would be an even better option, but there is likely too much overlap in these areas for that to be possible.

##### *Prevent Display of Content or Services for Company’s Agenda*
As talked about in class, India has regulated how Amazon is allowed to post their products, to prevent them from pushing their sales to the front instead of other items. This is one way that shows an attempt to prevent a company from simply pushing their own agenda, but rather supports what the user may prefer most. In some situations this may seem hard to regulate, on social media there seems to be no obligation to present content in a certain order. Regulation of this could help with ensuring that people are not being forced to see and interact with content they are not interested in.
##### *Comparing Both Approaches*
While both of these proposals would work in an ideal situation, there are some questions that prevent them from necessarily being possible. One is if there even is a legal or moral obligation to present content or products in a way that is most favorable for the user or not, and how this is determined. Companies like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter may think that a lot of what their algorithms are doing is to be most beneficial to the user, and not simply as a means of advertising or supporting sponsors. In this way there can be a grey area as to who is benefitting from what. In the same way, the collection of data and promotion of certain products, sites, or services in response to this data may be seen as in the best interest of the user by the company. Both of these proposed solutions may be possible, if slightly modified. Rather than a complete banning of collecting data and pushing certain content, the solution may be stronger regulation of these actions, and a more transparent disclosure of what these companies are doing. Each of these proposed methods puts the user as the main focus in decision making. They intend to support that in tech, users are granted the right to their own privacy and the ability to view what they want, even while using the product of a company.
##### *Conclusion*
Confucian Ethics has a hard time answering questions about things that do not involve interpersonal relationships as that is its main concern. That said, the best way to understand which of these two options is more favorable is probably to envision the company as a person and consider what advice Confucian Ethics would have for that situation. When one does that the question becomes is it more favorable to prevent another person from collecting information about you which would allow them to manipulate or change their behavior towards you or is it more favorable to prevent another person from using any information about you to exploit you. Confucian Ethics would probably advise the former: it is more favorable to prevent another person from collecting information about you which would allow them to change their behavior towards you to manipulate you. To Confucian Ethics this is favorable for two reasons. One, it is something that you have control over; you simply can not share information that you don’t want others to know. Two, it preserves the relationship that you have with the second person/company which is valuable in Confucian Ethics.
### __Confucian Ethics as a Force for Good__
####*Overview*
Corporate Social Responsibility is defined in the paper cited below as the “commitment of business to contribute to the sustainable economic development, working with employees, their families, the local community and society at large to improve their quality of life” (1).  A core tenet of Confucianism is to live your life in the way of the dao and to act with virtuous ethics, that is, to live your life the way we ought to in order to act ethically and to affect the most people in as positive a way as possible. In one of the articles we read, there was a discussion of four ways to practice Corporate Social Responsibility: environmental effects, philanthropy, ethical labor practices, and volunteering. Because the importance of relationships and acting virtuously in Confucianism is so important, it is easy to see how a company run by a group of Confucianists would find corporate social responsibility so important to enforce. As is stated in the paper discussing Confucian Ethics and corporate social responsibility, Confucianists would believe that “taking the right actions are more critical than just holding the belief” (1). For example, you may believe use or production of a product known to harm the environment is wrong and unethical, however, if you don’t take action to then not use or produce said product, you are in direct violation with Confucianism. One way Confucianists would enforce this is to hire leaders who are benevolent, compassionate, and willing to make business decisions for the betterment of the overall community, not just the company itself. By leading by example and making ethical and socially responsible business decisions, Confucian leaders could pave the way for other business leaders to follow suit, thus spreading their virtues to a larger population of people and bettering the world as a whole. These leaders are accountable to the people of the world themselves. Another way in which Confucianism would enforce corporate social responsibility would be to create processes and feedback loops within the corporation that stress the importance of giving back to the overall community and making decisions based on the betterment of the world. This should become a “natural function and part of the process or loop when doing business” (1). Our proposal would be to be constantly assessing the leaders and processes within a company. We would be checking to ensure that leaders are not only acting ethically when it comes to the four ways in which to practice corporate social responsibility, but also making sure that these leaders are acting in the best interest of the company and its employees while still making sure to consider the impact of major business decisions on the community as a whole. Similarly, we need to continuously examine processes within the company (i.e. hiring practices, production processes, financial management, customer relations, etc) to ensure that we are abiding by the same principles we ask of our leaders. If there is ever a discrepancy to be found, it would need to be reviewed and adjusted in order to better the overall community. (Source: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256048647_Confucian_Ethics_Governance_and_Corporate_Social_Responsibility)
####*Example*
An example of this can be seen in ethical labor practices. If a company, for example, knowingly employs workers and treats them unfairly (i.e. making them work long hours, not paying adequate overtime, forcing them to work in unsafe working conditions), our above proposal would require a review of all processes that go into these labor practices and a review of the leaders who let it happen. Confucianists would work towards creating a more stable work environment: one that benefits both those who are working for the company and the company itself. These positive relationships would then flow into a positive and more effective workplace. Whatever new leaders or policies are put in place would need to be consistently reviewed in order to ensure that the standards of ethical labor practices are being met through the eyes of a Confucianist.