---
layout: subpage
title: Egoist Ethics
image: css/sidgwick.png
subpage: true
coursepage: false
---

## “The good of any one individual is of no more importance, from the point of view (if I may so say) of the Universe, than the good of any other; unless, that is, there are special grounds for believing that more good is likely to be realized in the one case than in the other.”
### ― Henry Sidgwick, *The Methods of Ethics*


# WEBSITE POST 1
## Statement of Purpose
#### What makes an action ethical?

> The basic theory of egoist ethics is that one’s self is, or should be, the motivation and goal of one’s actions. Egoism has three main forms, psychological, ethical, and rational. For our purposes, the crucial form is ethical, as the other two make claims outside the boundaries of morality. Psychological egoism argues that every action an actor makes necessarily contributes to self-interest, and rational egoism claims that every rational action must be in an actor’s self-interest. Ethical egoism, however, is a consequential ethical framework. Under it, an action is ethical if and only if the result of that action maximizes the self interest of the actor. 

#### What triggers the need to evaluate an action?
> As mentioned earlier, ethical egoism is consequentialist. As a result, all actions are measured by the consequences of their actions. Thus, in terms of ethical egoism, actions are evaluated as ethical or not after the action has occurred. If an action results in the maximization of self interest for the individual actor it is ethical. In this case, intent does not matter, and neither does the result of the action on other people, unless those people contribute to the self interest of the actor. For example, someone who almost gets caught stealing a generous sum of money from someone else, but is not caught, has, according to ethical egoism, acted ethically. Despite the fact that the victim loses their money and the actor almost got caught, intentions and consequences upon someone else are irrelevant to ethical egoists. This person acted in their own self-interest, and as long as they face no long term consequences or psychological issues, they have acted ethically.


#### Predisposition to act in accordance to Egoist ethics
> Many would argue that in our capitalistic society, most people are prone to prescribing to egoist actions. This is the thought between psychological and rational egoism, which both proclaim that people have predispositions towards egoistic behavior. In particular, psychological egoism argues that every action a human being ever takes must be in their self-interest or they would never do it. According to this framework, even things that we would often consider selfless, such as charity or sacrifice, are done because of self-interest: maybe the actor wanted fame, acclaim, or a feeling of accomplishment. Rational egoism does not make a bold claim regarding “every action.” Instead, it argues that the only rational decisions that people make are the ones in their self-interest. Any other decision is necessarily irrational. Thus, exorbitant sacrifice would be considered irrational, but possible, under this framework.

#### Three issues in computer technology
##### Issue #1: Affirmative Action in Technology.
> Say, in this hypothetical, that the person we are talking about is a white male in technology. Using ethical egoism as our ethical foundation for this, the actor would be firmly against the implementation or maintenance of affirmative action in technology. Given that ethical egoism demands actions that have the consequence of maximizing self-interest, white men in technology would be acting ethically if they fought against affirmative action policies. These policies, while vastly beneficial towards creating equity in technology and lifting up marginalized voices, also result in the leveling of the playing field and thus harming the success of some white men. Since ethical egoism is consequentialist, the consequences of affirmative action would prove to be unethical for a white male.  

##### Issue #2: Plagiarism
> Consider a scenario where a developer is working under a tight deadline on an area of computer science that is not necessarily well documented or thoroughly explored.  The developer finds code on the internet that solves all of their current problems.  From an egoist perspective, it would be perfectly ethical for the developer to copy and paste the code without citing it or giving the proper credit to the original creator.  Plagiarism such as this harms creator of the original code, but it benefits the developer who copy-pasted it.  Although most ethical frameworks would consider this action to be unethical and, unless the code was open source, would most likely be considered illegal.  However, the egoist ethical framework has no problem with a developer stealing the intellectual property of someone else because it benefits the developer.

##### Issue #3: Whistleblowing
> For example, in a scenario where a company is doing something illegal, an employee could choose to not disclose it to the proper authorities and continue to let it happen. This would be within the guidelines of an egoist ethical framework because it would not be in that employee’s best interest to expose that information. Say that they are working for the government. Then, leaking this information would be illegal, and they could face serious legal repercussions and end up incarcerated. Therefore, this definitely would not in the best self-interest of the employee.

### IEEE Code of Ethics:
#### Briefly summarize the similarities between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. 
> The main similarity between the IEEE code of ethics and egoist ethics deals with point 6, which calls on people to “maintain and improve [their] technical competence”.  Doing so is quite obviously beneficial to the self and so aligns with egoist philosophies.  Another similarity between the two is in point 7, which talks about seeking and accepting honest criticism.  Honest criticism has a focus of self-improvement and someone seeking out criticism has an opportunity to benefit themselves by learning from their mistakes.

#### Briefly summarize the differences between the code of ethics and your ethical framework.
> The areas in which the IEEE code of ethics differs from the egoist framework are those which deal with the protection, education, and fair treatment of others, most notable in points 1, 5, 8, 9, and 10.  According to the egoist ethical framework, one should do what is in their own self interest.  This says nothing about the well-being or interests of others.  So, while the points listed above do not directly contradict with the egoist framework, they would be of no concern to an egoist as they say nothing about whether they promote the interests of the egoist themself. 

#### State something that is missing from the code of ethics which your ethical framework can provide.
> What the IEEE code of ethics is missing is a purpose or motivation for the ethical decisions made by one following the code.  While not all points of the IEEE code of ethics align with the egoist ethical framework (as explained above), egoist ethics can give a purpose to the areas in which egoist ethics apply.  In the egoist ethical framework, all ethical actions have a purpose, namely to benefit oneself.  If the IEEE code had a purpose behind them, it can guide people on the way to act in a situation in which the code of ethics cannot provide guidance or is ambiguous.  Although the IEEE code of ethics need not have the purpose of self-promotion as egoist ethics has, it can still benefit from a greater meaning that motivates the principles of the code of ethics.

### ACM Code:
#### Briefly summarize the similarities between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. 
> The ACM code of ethics gives some guidelines to the individual, such as telling them to be honest and trustworthy. This aligns with an egoist ethical framework because it is usually is in one’s best interest to be honest and disclose any mistakes in the present in order to maintain trustworthiness with other professionals in the future. That said, if a bug is discovered by someone and he does not think anyone will notice it, he could choose to not disclose it. This would be in line with an egoist ethical framework because if it will not affect him in the future, it is not in his best interest to spend the extra time fixing the bug. 

#### Briefly summarize the differences between the code of ethics and your ethical framework.
> The ACM code of ethics discusses the consequences of certain actions that affect other people and society in general, which is not taken into account in egoist ethics. The very first point made in the ACM code of ethics is that members must contribute to society and avoid doing harm to others. From the perspective of an egoist ethics framework, one does not have to worry about other people and should focus on maximizing their own self-interest. In the ACM code of ethics there is also a focus on educating the public and participating in outreach initiatives. Again, these are not relevant to egoist ethics unless these activities somehow aligned with an individual maximizing their own self-interest.

#### State something that is missing from the code of ethics which your ethical framework can provide.
> The ACM code of ethics does not say anything about any sort of ethical hacking. It says that under no circumstance should one enter a system, software, or files without explicit permission. An egoist ethical framework could provide some helpful guidelines on this. For example, say there is a malicious system that is attacking your software. Hacking into and stopping that system would be in line with egoist ethics because it would be in your best interest to stop it.

### ICCP:
#### Briefly summarize the similarities between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. 
> Some of the statements in the ICCP are largely in agreement with egoist ethics; for example, section 3.1 recommends that members should continue their education in their fields of study. Continued education is likely a good investment for even the most self-interested members due to its ability to increase job performance. Also, while section 2.7 on accountability may not seem to be done primarily out of self-interest, a lack of accountability my negatively affect the judgements of one’s coworkers, and hamper attempts at promotion. Furthermore, by not being accountable for the quality of one’s work, clients may receive a poorly developed product, making them less likely to continue the professional relationship. Thus, being accountable on the job is in accordance with the egoist ethical framework. 


#### Briefly summarize the differences between the code of ethics and your ethical framework.
> Section 2.2 of the ICCP code of ethics notes that the members are expected to act with a sense of ‘Social Responsibility,’ meaning that they should act to improve ‘public safety’ and try to educate the general public about their professional field. Actions such as these are not encouraged by the egoist ethics unless they are done in self-interest as well, so this section represents a significant departure from what would be encouraged. Section 2.5 of the code states that members should not claim falsely claim competence that is not possessed. However, egoist ethics would likely allow for one to lie about competence if it caused a direct benefit to the liar. For example, lying during a job interview to increase the chance of getting the job would be considered acceptable. 

#### State something that is missing from the code of ethics which your ethical framework can provide.
> While the code of ethics may not make any comments about general self-interested business decisions, the egoist framework does. For example, if an employee is being told to frequently work overtime while being paid under market value, then it may seem reasonable for the employee to seek out an employer that would treat them more fairly. The code of ethics makes not comment on this, while the egoist framework would label this move as ethically correct. 


# WEB POST 2

### Write a summary and response to the controversy surrounding H-1B visas

#### A brief summary of arguments in favor of the H-1B visa system

> Support of the H-1B visa system is two fold allowing it to both bolster the United States economy and protect the interests of its citizens that are also trying to find gainful employment in a competitive tech landscape. The world is filled with highly educated and trained employees and a lot of them want to take advantage of the opportunities that are present within US companies.  The H-1B visa allows for rolls to be filled -  up to 65,000, plus an extra 20,000 for those who graduate with a masters of PhD from a US institution - that would otherwise be left empty.  This helps companies grow and provide more benefits to the people of the country where they pay taxes, the United States.  While companies want to have access to the best talent around the world, the H-1B visa does a strong job of protecting the interests of the citizen also seeking similarly advanced roles within companies.  By enforcing the aforementioned limits on the numbers of visas issued and by adding a cost that the employer must pay to get access to the visa’ed workers, US workers are given two advantages.  They create a cost advantage, where a company that hires a citizen does not have to pay the cost to support their presence in the country.  In addition, by limiting the overall number of visas, you can create an upper ceiling where after a certain point companies that chose to work in the United States, have to find talent at home.  The benefits of the H-1B visa allows it to be a powerful tool to spur growth in the US in high talent fields, without compromising the american worker.


#### A brief summary of arguments in opposition to the the H-1B visa system
> The H-1B system, while it may have the intention of stimulating the american economy by bringing over bright and talented workers, in reality provides an opportunity for companies to outsource their work and use the cheap labor to undercut companies that hire american citizens.  In order to avoid certain regulations for workers on visas, companies that hire H-1B employees must pay them at least $60,000 which, especially for major tech companies such as Google and Microsoft, is far below the competitive salary for american workers.  However, the real problems with the H-1B system don’t typically come from the major tech companies.  In fact, in 2014 Google, Microsoft, Facebook, and Uber only employed 2 percent of the H-1B workers.  The real problems come from companies like Infosys, Cognizant, Wipro, and Tata, who in 2014 accounted for a quarter of all private sector H-1B visas.  These companies bring in workers using the H-1B visa then rent them out as consultants for much cheaper than companies hiring american workers.  While some may make the argument that the cap on H-1B visas means that they can only displace a certain amount of U.S. jobs, the effects of hiring workers on H-1B visas for significantly less than american citizens can expand beyond the simple 65,000 visa allotment.  When these consulting companies fill their positions with H-1B workers, not only do they take these positions away from U.S. citizens, but they also take away positions at other consulting companies that were run out of business because they were paying their american employees a competitive wage instead of outsourcing their labor.  The H-1B system is easily abused by companies that pay their employees on visas significantly less than american citizens, enough to offset the cost of the visa and then some. Allowing people to work in america without citizenship denies them certain right, which means companies can abuse the inherently flawed H-1B system to outsource work for cheap labor that takes thousands of jobs from american citizens.

#### A response containing insights your ethical framework may provide to the controversy. 
> From an egoist perspective and if we take the view of a US citizen, H-1B visas are not a good thing. As a US citizen, it is in my own personal best interest that people from other countries are not given the opportunity to work US jobs. Offering H-1B visas allows companies to pay non-American citizens less to do work that an American citizen could do for a competitive wage. From an American company’s perspective, however, H-1B visas are in their self-interest. Just as the company’s described above used the H-1B visa program to outsource much of their consulting work, it is in a company’s self interest to pay as little as possible to their employees to turn the greatest profit. Additionally, H-1B visas allow companies to bring in talent from outside the US that they might not be able to find here, and gives them the opportunity to hire non-US citizens who have specialized skill sets. From the egoist opinion of a non-US citizen, H-1B visas are absolutely a good thing. This program allows them to get hired for work in the US, an opportunity that may be much more difficult without it. They might be paid less than their American counterparts, which they almost certainly (and many would say, rightly) disagree with, but it still allows them to get their foot in the door of the American job market. An egoists view of the H-1B visa thus depends on which actor they are in the process. From an egoist perspective, there’s not a way to make everyone happy here, if each party is truly acting in their own self-interest. But egoism doesn’t attempt to make everyone happy.


### Write a response to the Google internal memo

#### A brief summary of the content of the memo. 
> The Google internal memo is one Google employee’s critique of Google’s efforts at addressing diversity and inclusion issues internally. His arguments center on his belief that Google has become an “Ideological Echo Chamber”, where people who disagree with the majority views are shamed into silence, while prevailing rhetoric generates a left-leaning, “politically correct monoculture.” He addresses the gender gap in tech by appealing to supposed biological differences between men and women, as well as personality differences. He proposes what he considers to be non-discriminatory ways to reduce the gender gap that target the differences he previously mentioned. Additionally, he purports striving for better gender and racial diversity, but disagrees with programs and practices created specifically for underrepresented groups in tech on the basis that they exclude others. He exhorts employees to confront their biases, stop alienating conservatives, de-moralize diversity, open up programs to everyone, and talk more openly about the effectiveness of current programs and practices. The writer believes the focus at Google should be on psychological safety rather than race or gender diversity, claiming that this focus will keep out unfair discrimination. He believes that empathy should be kept out of the issue and that focus should be transferred from microaggressions and unconscious bias to an openness about the “science of human nature.” Overall, this employee is using this “screed” as an attempt to address the biases he sees in Google’s ideology and is calling for an “open and honest discussion with those who disagree” to highlight Google’s “blind spots and help [them] grow.”

#### A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either valid or ethical.
> The memo points discuss the notion of an echo chamber and an intolerance for ideas that do not fit in a certain ideology which in turn can lead to the bias, potentially psychologically harmful, running of a company. The writer of the memo argues that this type of environment does not allow for the problem of diversity in tech to be solved due to lack of discourse. From the perspective of an egoist, this point is valid as it is in the best interest of one’s self to allow others to feel safe in sharing their own opinion as this sort of treatment will then be extended towards oneself. Additionally, diversity and inclusion bring benefits to oneself, so any discussion or debates that further the issue, is something that is in one’s best interest to participate in. The memo also discusses treating people like individuals and not as part of a group. The egoist would agree with this point in that often it is in one’s self-interest to be treated as an individual and not lumped in with a group that is subject to stereotypes and assumptions.9

#### A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either invalid or unethical.
> While egoist ethics claims that individuals show prioritize themselves over others, the google memo presents a critique on how the organization’s culture as a whole was ineffective and biased against conservatives, and made suggestions about what the company could do in response. However, egoist ethics would say that the other members of the company should base their actions on their own interest rather than the interests of the company as a whole (which may value diversity for economic or recruiting reasons) or according to an ideal of freedom of speech and belief. So, even though the memo may have represented the author’s interests, other employees may choose not a change their behavior in accordance with the memo unless it benefits them. Since Google may value the presence of underrepresented groups and a restriction on the expression of potentially offensive ideas, the other employees may find that the memo does not represent their interests, and find it unconvincing and disregard its argument, in accordance with egoist ethics. 
To put it simply, the memo makes a normative statement about how other people in the company should behave, which violates the egoist ethics idea that people should prioritize their own interests over the interests of others. 

### Write an analysis of gender bias issues in tech

#### A brief summary of outstanding gender issues in tech.
> Stereotypes have always played a part in the technology field. The two major areas where I believe gender bias and misrepresentation are most prevalent are in the education field and in hiring and promotion at technology firms. In education, even as more women join CS programs across the nation, they find themselves rarely taught by women. Even as top programs are searching high and low, the talent pool of women teachers in Technology has not been built up to the necessary levels. In often male-dominated classes, and possibly facing discrimination and jokes, women must carve their own path to surpass unnecessary expectations.  In the field of technology corporations, the issue of gender in some cases is even more extreme. Facing discrimination at the hiring level, as you work up the corporate ladder the lack of female representation is obvious. As mentioned in one of the articles, women often have to ignore and brush off comments in order to obtain respect and avoid labels of being “emotional” or “over-reactionary”.  At upper levels as well, recently rules have had to be enforced by the government requiring women on the boards at tech companies, a voice of long missing from the tables at very prestigious Silicon Valley names.  Both of these disparities highlight a larger issue, a lack of role models and career milestones for women to follow and look to emulate. They have been strong enough to continue to push forward, but men enjoy the ability to envision themselves in the place of their peers, while women have to continue to break glass ceilings. Floor by floor, until gender diversity is no longer something that companies feel required to fulfil, but something that is celebrated by all. 

#### A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework.
> The two issues we believe are the most important in today’s technology world are hiring and promotion in the workplace and the education field. According to an egoist ethical framework, the current situation of gender bias in technology is not a problem. If one is looking out for their own self-interest, it does not matter if certain groups are underrepresented. It only matters that individuals are doing what is in their own self-interest. If you also include a female perspective to this issue, this could actually be seen as a good thing because there is a push for women in technology roles, meaning that there may be more opportunities for women. The second issue we brought up is gender bias in the workplace. From an egoist ethical framework, if you are running a company and there is a gender bias in the treatment of employees, this is unethical. It is not in your best self-interest because this could slow production or even cause legal problems for you and your firm which would lead to less profits, less money in your pocket, and less job security for you. In the case of gender discrimination in hiring, it may not be unethical depending on if you are a part of the group being discriminated against. It would depend on if you have more opportunities given to you based on your gender. For example, males in the workplace are given jobs or promoted over women impart due to their gender and attributes commonly associated with their gender. In this case, it is ethical if you are male because this would benefit you, therefore being in your best self-interest. If you are a part of any other gender group, you would be discriminated against, which would be unethical according our egoist framework.

### Write an analysis of race and ethnicity issues in tech

#### A brief summary of outstanding race and ethnicity issues in tech
> As noted earlier, stereotypes and biases have always played an outsized role in thwarting equality in technology. This is seen not just in a lack of gender equity, but also in the racial disparities in the tech field. While issues regarding equity in fields outside of technology are often regarding salary or leadership positions, in technology there is also a huge ethnic gap in all positions, including entry-level coding jobs. White Americans are vastly overrepresented in technology, and African-Americans and Latinx-Americans are vastly underrepresented. In terms of the number of computer science majors every year, Asian-Americans are the only minority group to put out a proportionate amount of majors to population. This could be for a host of reasons, but biases and opportunity to study CS earlier in life both play a big role in the issue.
Notably, while the fact that black and latinx people are underrepresented in computer science majors may be troubling, the statistics at big technology companies are even worse. Only 2.5% of Google workers are black, 3.6% latinx, and 0.3% native. Asian Americans, on the other hand, are incredibly overrepresented, making up 36.3% of Google’s workforce. In terms of leadership positions, the numbers fall drastically for all of the minority groups, including Asian Americans. This means that while we are slowly closing in on the gap between population proportions and computer science degrees among ethnic groups, we are failing to close that gap in elite tech companies. While tech as a whole might be getting more diverse, leading corporations, specifically those in Silicon Valley, remain heavily white and heavily asian-american.

#### A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework
> The egoist would consider the underrepresentation of minorities, specifically African-Americans and Latin-Americans, in computer science programs across the country an issue. Since we are responding to this issue as prospective computer scientists that value the best interest of the tech industry, it is best to have as many people studying computer science as possible so there are more qualified candidates available to work in the tech industry. Thus, it would be in the best interest of the tech industry to have more minorities pursuing computer science education. Consequently, the egoist would advise tech industry leaders to try to address the driving forces of this issue including biases and the opportunity to study CS earlier in life.

> Despite providing seemingly charitable advice to the tech industry regarding the lack of minorities studying computer science, the egoist advice regarding the lack of diversity in the workforce is quite harsh. The egoist would likely interpret this issue through an objective lense by asking the following question: “Are the best developers being hired?” If the answer is no, and bias is causing companies to turn away qualified minorities for less qualified majorities, the egoist would advise the company to correct this issue because their best interest is to hire the best developers. However, if companies are in fact hiring the most qualified candidates and still have vastly underrepresented minorities, the egoist would not consider it an issue, and would advise the companies to continue operating in this manner.

# WEB POST 3

### Summary

#### Summary of three outstanding issues in corporate ethical responsibility in tech
> The landscape under which technology companies are able to operate and grow is undergoing a massive change from the internet boom of the 1990’s and 2000’s.  We have seen the scale with which they can operate and the power which they can wield through society. 

> The first outstanding issue will be to better define the relationship that companies, especially tech companies enter with their employees.  We can see this in the recent open letter to end project Dragonfly, which was work to create a censored search engine for China. They felt that this went against the core beliefs that they bought into when he joined the Google team, and Alphabet - their parent company that has almost a hundred thousand employees. It will take effort to define if a corporation can really have beliefs, and how those are reconciled when they may not be in the best interest of the bottom line.

> Secondly, we are tasked with defining the philanthropic efforts that we are comfortable with corporations undergoing.  Currently, the major tech companies enjoy a very low rate of taxation, due to the ability to leverage loopholes present in a tax code not designed for a digital economy.  This allows them to have evaluations, and war chests of cash, that are larger than some countries’ GDP. However, they do have a track record of trying to provide a lot of public good.  The economy has grown along with them and we are going to need to soon address the issue of how much of a role they should be able to play in social good.  Are we selling ourselves too much when we look to corporations, whose goal is to make money, to provide more of basic quality of life than the government?  In addition, what spirit are those donations being made?  Do we want to be remembered for being too naive to see a clever marketing tool when we see one?

> Finally,  I think privacy is going to become a defining issue with regards to technology companies.  We have to acknowledge that if a service or product is free to use, like Facebook, then we are the product that they are selling - not the other way around.  Tech companies and society are going to have to find a way to bridge the gap between their products and a population that overall is not as digitally literate.  When a user signs up or uses a product, what guarantees of safety and anonymity are they entitled to, and are we, as a society, willing to give up a tailored song or ad recommendations if that is the cost. 

> It is not going to be a unilateral decision on any front, but I think the conversation starts with being honest about how pervasive these companies are in our lives.  Once we can understand how little we know, can we then make steps through regulation and culture to resolve the questions that come up at such a pivotal time in technology?  


### Critique

#### A summary of Uber's action being analyzed
> In 2017, Chief Security Officer Joe Sullivan and his subordinates paid hackers their ransom note of $100,000 in order to delete data that the hackers had stolen and did not disclose it to the public or the affected users/drivers. To get access to the data, hackers found a public GitHub being used by engineers at Uber that had login credentials that enabled them to access the data. The data stolen affected 50 million riders and about 7 million drivers in the form of their names, email addresses, phones numbers, and driver’s license numbers. At the time of the breach, Uber was undergoing proceedings for previous accusations of privacy violations by the Federal Trade Commission and Sullivan did not want this new hack and loss of data to cause additional issues. However, an investigation into Sullivan’s team quickly revealed the cover-up. 

> Travis Kalanick, the previous CEO of Uber, knew of the incident as it happened and allowed for the cover-up to happen. State and federal laws require companies to alert people and government agencies when sensitive data breaches occur. Uber is no exception to this. Uber’s current CEO, Dara Khosrowshahi, said there was no excuse for what happened because Uber was obligated to report the hack of driver’s license information and failed to do so. This is not the first of Uber’s maleficence and they have faced many suits in the past. In fact, some governments have taken steps toward banning the service, citing what they say is reckless behavior by Uber. In response to the news of the attack hitting the public, Uber told customers that is has not seen any evidence of fraud or misuse tied to the incident. Uber also offered free credit protection monitoring and identity theft protection to drivers who had their licenses compromised. 


#### An identification of why that action is unethical as defined by your ethical framework

> The most obvious signs of the unethical action in this scenario is the negative effects it had on the company.  Not only did Uber lose $100,000 as a ransom to the hackers, but their attempts to cover up their actions provoked a negative response by the public, most likely affecting people’s trust in the company.  As stated above, this mistrust has led some governments to ban Uber, reducing Uber’s revenue and damaging their progress as a company.  While egoist ethics call for the agent (in this case Uber) to act in a way that is most beneficial to themselves, sometimes this may require an action that does not necessarily benefit the agent in the short term, but has greater benefits in the long term.  With the fear of adding another incident to their already mounting security issues, Uber tried to forgo the short term setback of questionable security in exchange for the possibility of doing later harm if the coverup was ever discovered.  If they had announced the security breach earlier, it may have dealt a lighter blow to their reputation than trying to cover it up.  The difficult part of situations such as these is that, from the perspective of egoist ethics, it’s very difficult, and sometimes impossible, to know which decision will have the greater positive effect.  However, with the benefit of hindsight, we can definitively say that the decision to cover up the security breach was unethical according to the egoist ethical framework because it was detrimental to Uber’s own self interest, which is to be a thriving and successful company. 

#### A conclusion of how the corporation may have acted ethically in the situation, according to your framework
> In this situation, it is important to consider the following distinction: if Uber covers up the breach, is it reasonable for them to expect that no one will ever find out about it? Based on whether the answer to this question is yes or no, the egoist framework will have a different response to how Uber could have acted ethically in this situation.

> If the answer to this question is yes, which means that it is reasonable to assume that Uber can effectively, entirely cover up the breach, it is in their best interest to go ahead and cover it up. If they are able to successfully cover it up without anyone ever knowing, their reputation will never take a hit and the company will never be negatively affected by the hack. It is worth noting that in this case the customers whose information was stolen may be negatively affected but they will never know that it was Uber’s doing so this does not affect Uber’s self-interest.


> However, based on both the number of people within the company that knew about the breach and the likelihood that the hackers would publicize the attack after they received the ransom, Uber should have assumed that the breach would eventually be made public. Since this was a reasonable expectation, according to the egoist ethics framework Uber should have immediately disclosed all of the information that they had about the breach and the hackers to the FTC and other appropriate government entities and alerted all of the customers that could have been affected by the breach. Foremost, this would have been in Uber’s best self-interest because there was still an opportunity for Uber to catch the hackers, pursue legal action, and secure users’ information. Even if the hackers could not be caught, by immediately reporting the incident Uber could have minimized the negative publicity and maintained their image as an honest, transparent company. However, by not doing this, they acted against their self-interest by putting their users’ privacy at risk, losing $100,000, and damaging their public image.

### Comparison

#### A summary for both proposed methods to solve unethical corporate behavior
> The first method for solving unethical corporate behavior is making harsher legal sanctions on companies for such unethical conduct. This would include such things as mandates for companies to have legal compliance programs, which many companies have already made for themselves to protect themselves against unethical behavior within the company. These types of programs would increase internal policing by increasing surveillance and making harsher penalties. Harsher legislation that requires full disclosure of actions and makes unlawful the non-disclosure of improprieties, could serve to better police corporations and keep them honest. The idea here is that more laws will force corporations to be more ethical.

> Many believe, however, that this type of method is often counterproductive and less helpful than it may seem. A second method for solving unethical corporate behavior is one based on instilling an integrity strategy in business. This type of strategy puts ethics first and outrightly places integrity as the guiding force within the company. This type of method often includes internal programs for educating employees on legal matters and practices, has a code of conduct, builds clear, organized structures for handling unethical behavior within the company, and consistent “check-ups” to ensure such standards and behaviors are being met. If a business decides to use such a method, it may be more difficult, but it will weave ethical behavior into the fabric of the organization and ideally make ethical behavior natural and unethical behavior easy to spot and handle.


#### A comparison between the two proposed methods
> The first proposed method for solving unethical corporate behavior is making harsher legal sanctions on companies. One issue with following this method is that if something is not illegal, then the company is still free to do it without thinking about the ethics of their decision. This means that unethical behavior can still happen as long as there is no law that bans it. This type of approach also overemphasizes surveillance and punishment in order to keep employees in check with the law. This can backfire on employers when employees do not agree with or do not fully understand why a sanction was put into place, and they rebel against the system, meaning that unethical corporate behavior is not stopped.

> Another solution to unethical corporate behavior that we proposed is based on integrity rather than only law. It would work by instilling an integrity strategy in the business. This approach rests on the fact there is a set of principles that guides a company and all of their decisions. These principles define the company and what it stands for. Unlike the first method, this would give employees a set of rules that are aligned with ethical behavior, rather than just the legality of a decision. This should help prevent unethical behavior, even if it is legal. Also by sharing a company’s principles publicly, this type of approach would give employees more of an understanding of why they need to follow the guidelines set before them. This understanding means that employees are much more likely to follow the rules and take the guiding principles to heart. This system places a greater focus on attitude rather than actions and consequences.


#### A conclusion stating which proposal is more favorable according to your ethical framework
> From the point of view of a company, public knowledge of unethical behavior can cause considerable damage to the company’s image, which affects its ability to remain successful. Thus, it is imperative that the company avoid this negative publicity and damage by ensuring that business is conducted with integrity (or, that any nefarious behavior is hidden). Since the employees and leadership of a company derive value from the success of the organization, they will likely act in the best interest of the company; thus, they will choose to install a robust system of maintaining integrity within the business. This is in contrast with the first proposal of government punishment and oversight; while the oversight may reduce potentially damaging behavior, the punishments are likely damaging to the company, while the second option avoids further punishment. 

> Furthermore, by creating internal programs that encourage ethical behavior, the opportunity to mold the culture of the company is created, and employees may be educated on practices that benefit the company. Then, as a result of the ethical behavior, the company will be better able to attract talent and keep employee morale high, as other technology companies may not have such high standards of behavior. Without these standards, forging a company culture will be much more difficult. 

> Another extrinsic reward of this proposal is that the reputation of the company in the public eye may be enhanced, which will improve future business. This is especially relevant if the company is situated in industries known for unethical practices, as the ethical behavior will be seen as even more laudable. Lastly, the ability for the company to choose its own punishments for rule-breaking behavior allows it to ensure that the company is not considerably harmed. However, if the government chooses punishments, it may punish the company as a whole, which is not in many of the employee’s best interests. 


### Proposal 

#### A general overview of how your ethical framework would enforce or reinforce corporate social responsibility
> As seen by the examples above, egoist ethics approaches decisions regarding corporate responsibility (CSR) through the lense of how the decisions will help the company. As a result, in terms of CSR, whether in activism, lobbying, or philanthropy, egoism would advise companies to do whatever helps their bottom line. This seems to be the prevailing lense through which most corporations view CSR today: how can they use “social good” as a selling point or publicity effort. 

> Thus, the egoist ethical framework will often be in favor of corporate social responsibility as long as it is well publicized. Say that Comcast donated a million dollars to broadband services for poor neighborhoods while actively making billions from its monopolization that caused that same situation. In this case, if Comcast was able to run TV ads and build goodwill through its donation, it would be acting ethically. The only time its actions would be considered unethical from the egoist framework is if the donation didn’t help Comcast’s end goal. 

> That may have been a drastic example, but it is analogous to most CSR happening right now, and seems to be the reason CSR has made such a huge uptick in recent times. Egoism reinforces this trend, and would definitely support the use of CSR for corporate success.



#### A brief example of an instance where the proposed overview would correct unethical behavior
> An example of how an egoist perspective would allow for the correction of unethical behavior can be found when we look at social networks and data privacy. While running a social network, companies are trusted to store a large amount of data about the users. Places they have checked in, photos they post, and messages between friends all must be saved in order to provide the best user experience. It is tempting for companies to take this data both private and public and sell it to the highest bidder. Allowing them to bring in non-ad revenue and take advantage of the large demographic pool they have collected. However, a large amount of liability is accepted by the company if anything was to go wrong with if the user data was misused.  In the current privacy environment, an Egoist perspective would cause the business to reduce this liability for the sake of the company’s reputation and instead use the lack of selling data as a selling point to drive user growth.  When what happens to be unethical is also bad for the company, the egoist perspective can allow for the correction of bad practices. This hypothetical social network would be encouraged to correct this behavior by notifying their users about the use and restriction levels put on their data and then launching an ad campaign promoting the control and clarity of the platform’s data usage. 

> It is important to realize that the egoist perspective, however, does require the company to sell data in the first place. This behavior would not have had to be corrected until it became a liability to the bottom line. Facebook for example did not have to worry about privacy nearly as much until its selling habits were exposed. If data can be sold while still maintaining a certain amount of digression to who knows the parties involved and what types of data are sold, an egoist would maintain this is the best course of action.

> In this day and age, we are seeing much more social conscious consumers, and the egoist perspective reacts to those consumers needs by making social responsibility and charity almost a requirement. It is a way to drive business and, in the case of the social media company above, it is a chance to create a dedicated user base. With how many social media platforms people have to choose from, loyal users are invaluable. 
