---
layout: subpage
title: Ethics of Care
image: css/gilligan.png
subpage: true
coursepage: false
---

## “Caring requires paying attention, seeing, listening, responding with respect. Its logic is contextual, psychological. Care is a relational ethic, grounded in a premise of interdependence. But it is not selfless.”
### ― Carol Gilligan, *Joining the Resistance*

# Website Post 3

## Summary

Living in an increasingly interconnected world has its benefits and drawbacks for both people and corporations. Corporations in the tech industry are especially subject to issues regarding ethical responsibility as the industries of tech and big data are uncharted, and largely unregulated waters. Calls for corporate ethical responsibility are driven by shrinking government regulations and demands for greater disclosure - both of which exhibit specificity to the corporate tech industry. 

The three main issues shrouding corporate ethical responsibility in tech include information disclosures, data privacy, and anti-competitive behavior. Information disclosures are a key point in practicing transparency. They allow shareholders, financial institutions, and the general public to be informed about corporations’ financial activities and how these activities influence the environment, an important consideration for corporate ethical responsibility, society, and the overall economy. Just as recently as early 2018, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) called for tech companies to disclose more information when dealing with cybersecurity risks and vulnerabilities. Because of the rise of big data, tech companies are able to amass information of the public that allows larger numbers of people to be subject to security breaches and hacks. 

The role of big data plays directly into the next major issue of data privacy. Data privacy refers to the preservation and protection of personal information that tech corporations compile from user data from being accessible by third parties. Tech companies have faced a backlash in recent months about exploiting user data and Facebook particularly has faced the brunt of this backlash. The social media tech giant had been found to have mishandled Cambridge Analytica’s violation of their company’s privacy policies and allowed nearly 50 million users’ information to be bought by the third-party group. U.S. lawmakers have moved to curb the manipulation of user data by introducing legislation that required tech companies such as Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple to get user permission before sharing their data. It is not surprising that lawmakers have these tech giants in mind when creating these laws and these corporations dominate the tech industry. Which then shines a light on the third major issue in corporate ethical behavior in the tech industry which is monopolistic behavior. 

Competing actors in the tech industry have asserted that companies such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon are undermining their abilities to compete as they acquire various software companies and control greater portions of the market share. In fact, European legislators have fined Google for $5 billion due to their Android antitrust violations. The fine specified that Google had bundled its search engine and Chrome software within the Android operating system which gave the tech company larger control over the market. American lawmakers have also followed suit in addressing anti-competitive behavior by having the Federal Trade Commission investigate Google’s control over online-ads and search engines. 

Overall, corporate ethical responsibility calls for the disclosure of information, the protection of user data, and non-monopolistic behavior. Each of these stipulations works to keep the interest of consumers at the forefront, promote economic welfare, and encourage consumer choice. Because of the advent of technology has revolutionized the way data is collected and preserved, tech corporations face serious issues moving forward with regards to ethical corporate behavior. 


## Critique of a Specific Unethical Corporate Action

### Summary of Action Being Analyzed

The specific unethical corporate action being analyzed is the use of power and influence by large corporations, particularly those in the tech industry, to reduce and even eliminate competing companies. With certain companies, such as Facebook or Google, having such large presences in the tech world today, they have also gained the ability to serve as major influencers in the field. Because of this, the possibility for misuse of power and unethical behavior has become a reality with such massive corporations.
 
Some more concrete examples of this type of unethical corporate behavior includes the collection of data to research, and eventually buy out, competing companies. Facebook reportedly did this with Instagram shortly before buying it in 2012. Similarly, Amazon serves as a retailer on its own marketplace alongside other retailers. Google, with its role as the predominant search engine, has the power to show certain ads, and rank pages according to its own algorithm. With such a large reach into many aspects of people’s lives, these companies have been given the power to be anti-competitive, in the sense that they can essentially monopolize a certain field.

Another instance of this is Qualcomm, At its core, Qualcomm is a classic two pronged business, with about fifty percent of its revenue coming from the creation of chips for cell phones and other digital devices, such as its famous Snapdragon semi-conductor, and the other fifty percent coming from the licensing of its more than 150,000 either granted or applied and ongoing patents at a high cost (Patsnap.com). This sort of split for a company into two different fields is not that uncommon, but what is uncommon about Qualcomm is its business model, which it claims is not only legal, but ethical, according to their CEO Steven Mollenkopf in an interview with business insider.

Qualcomm’s business model is to sell their chips, which are necessary to most phones and a lot of which are fully patent protected, to companies at a normal price, but they take a royalty off of the sale of each phone that has a Qualcomm chip inside. While this may not be problematic by itself, where the issue comes into play is the fact that they only sell their chips to companies that pay to license a large amount of Qualcomm patents in a variety of technological field. This doesn’t allow for smaller companies in the field of sales of mobile devices to realistically compete with larger technology companies simply due to the fact that they don’t have access to Qualcomm products due to their lack of capital to pay for the right to use some of Qualcomm’s other, unrelated patents (FTC v Qualcomm Incorporated, US Court District of Northern California, 2017).
 
The practice of such unethical behavior has created issues, as these big companies gain more and more influence over the tech world. The propagation of this behaviors makes it increasingly harder to challenge large tech companies, creating a slippery slope for the future.

### Why This Is Unthethical According to the Ethics of Care

The ethics of care do not support unethical corporate actions such as anti-competitive behavior. This kind of unlawful competition strongly opposes the core values in the ethics of care. The ethics of care values attentiveness, which requires recognition of others' needs in order to respond to them. Large companies such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon all control greater portions of the market share and the importance for small tech companies to exist in the market, as they all have the potential to become big companies. Many of these large companies, without caring about the rights of their small rival companies, gather their data and eventually squash them out with their power. This kind of action is not only unlawful but also unethical according to the framework of care ethics. All corporate should have the responsibility, an essential part of the ethics of care, to maintain the competitiveness of the market and create a fair market for the customers. Instead, these big companies conduct anti-competitive actions to other companies such as violating intellectual property rights and damage the competitive environment of the development of many tech companies. 

The ethics of care also focuses on vulnerability and inequality, which many weaker companies have. Especially in the world full of rivalry between powerful tech companies, the weaker companies with their own technology patents are vulnerable. Many small companies are being bought out by larger companies, with their original goals thwarted and essence changed, as they have realized their limited opportunites to develop in the environment. The large companies, on the other hand, do not acknowledge or follow the ethics of care. They do not protect the interest of the market but only extend the interest of themselves. At the same time, Data or ideas are also often very easily transmitted or stolen by stronger companies. The framework of ethics of care suggests bigger companies to follow the antitrust laws to protect the interest of smaller companies and customers. Not only would small companies benefit from a good competitive environment, but customers also receive better products or services from the different levels of competition of different corporations. 

The ethics of care encourages diversity whereas the massive anti-competitive corporates discourage them. With the dynamic of more smaller companies, they invest, research and develop more different aspects of technology whereas large companies tend to explore the more financially beneficial fields of technology. The anti-competitive tech enviornment have allowed the larger companies to head in a more narrow direction and limited its ability to expand. Protecting and promoting others interest is a part of the ethics of care, the buying or absorption of smaller companies from companies like Goodgle or Facebook has limited the smaller companies to develop, as the market is no longer competitive. 

Responsiveness is critical to the ethics of care. The competitiveness in the relationship between tech companies naturally steers away from a mutually caring and corporate friendliness. But at the same time, there are also natually healthy competitive relationships between corporates that can develop in this enviornment. However, the unlawful antitrust violations and the stealing of intellectual properties prevent such relationship from stemming. Any kind of squashing from companies should be considered unethical as they have prevented the development of healthy competitive relationships. 

### How the Corporation Could Have Atced Ethically

The Ethics of Care revolves around respectful and nurturing relationships between parties. According to this framework, therefore, the companies in question who would have participated in the unethical behavior of squashing out competition could otherwise act ethically by fostering mutually beneficial relationships with competing companies. Instead of attempting to eliminate or acquire competitors, large corporations could seek to establish business partnerships that would increase the well-being of both parties. For example, a large corporation like Amazon could create regional and local partnerships to aid with the distribution and storage of products. Similarly, Google would certainly put on a good image by treating all pages equally in a page rank system. This in turn would create trust and respect from smaller, competing companies.
 
Ethics of Care is also very much concerned about caring for the vulnerable. As large entities with a considerable amount of power and influence, big tech corporations have an ethical duty to look out for companies that may be struggling, or that simply do not have the reach that larger corporations do. As discussed before, big corporations could seek to create partnerships or “mentoring” relationships to other corporations, as this would certainly promote good relationships. On top of this, healthy competition would not only benefit the companies involved, but also the corresponding field as a whole, since competition would promote innovation and changes for the better.
 
The ethical framework laid out by the Ethics of Care is supremely relevant to the unethical corporate behavior analyzed here. If companies would seek to build up strong relationships rather than tear them down, the corporate world could become stronger, more competitive, and ultimately more forward-looking.

## Comparison of Methods For Solving Unethical Behavior

### Summary of Proposed Methods

Different instances of unethical corporate behavior require specific responses to correct the behavior. Some of the more pressing areas of unethical corporate behavior are monopolistic actions and the exploitation of user data. Anti-competitive behaviors exhibited by firms are restricted by regulatory legislation. Regulations could take the form of company break-ups or the prevention of new acquisitions.
 
Company break-ups would require tech giants to relinquish their control auxiliary tech platforms in order to open up the market share and prevent monopolies. For example, in the United States, the Department of Justice could mandate that YouTube is separated from Google or that Facebook is split from Instagram. The prospect of breaking-up companies is not new as antitrust laws have been a force for anti-monopoly legislation for centuries. In Europe as well, the European Commission has taken action to tackle the monopolistic tendencies of leading tech corporations. The commission recently fined Google for $5 billion over bundling its search engine within Android products.
 
The strategy of breaking-up tech corporations does not necessarily have to be left in the hands of government agencies. Corporations could act preemptively when faced with early charges of anti-competitive behavior by handling their own company break-up and deciding which area to relinquish ownership of rather than allowing federal agencies to decide. The policy of breaking-up companies or “trustbusting” is a particularly favorable endeavor on the left. Because it is regulatory in nature, it allows the government to have greater oversight of big tech companies such as Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple which as these companies amass large quantities of user data.
 
A method to combat the exploitation of user data is the call for data portability and interoperability. Data portability refers to the idea that users of tech companies’ software should be essentially able to pack up their personal user data and store that information elsewhere, whether that be in a competitor’s software or the user’s personal drive. The purpose of this method is to give users greater control over their own data and the freedom to decide how that data is stored. Furthermore, interoperability refers to the sharing of user data with competitors. This would weaken tech giants’ hold on personal user data that allows them to control large shares of the tech market.
 
Similar to the method of breaking-up tech corporations, the strategy of requiring data portability and interoperability relies on legislative regulations. In Europe, for example, the General Data Protection Regulation is seeking to require that the service of data portability be available on other platforms that collect user data. Both of these methods to combat unethical corporate behavior rely on government oversight which is easily subjected political sentiments that advocate for or against government intervention. It is no surprise though that both methods to combat unethical corporate behavior in tech relies on legislative action as the tech world is largely uncharted waters and can change rapidly. Therefore, it is difficult for legislation to keep up with new features and developments in the tech industry which is why there are constant calls for greater legislative action to curb new developments. 

Additionally, both methods of combating unethical corporate behavior have their drawbacks. With regard to breaking-up tech companies to prevent monopolistic behavior, these tech companies could avoid such action by lobbying legislators who vote on antitrust laws in big tech. For example, in 2017, about $50 billion was spent by tech industry companies to lobby against regulatory laws that would curb acquisitions that contribute to the creation of near monopolies. And with regard to data portability, such services exist as aforementioned, however users are not likely to put in the effort to take advantage of such services. Therefore, companies like Google, Amazon, and Facebook are still left with control over large amounts of user data. Furthermore, as with breaking-up companies and data portability, interoperability also has its drawbacks. Since it calls for tech companies to share their user data with other up and coming companies to ensure their ability to compete, this process is not necessarily in the best interest of the user as their data is being distributed without user consent.

It is important to note that neither the method of breaking-up tech giants or requiring data portability or interoperability can completely deter unethical corporate behavior. There are many avenues through which corporations can circumvent legislations curbing their large control over the market share and user data whether through lobbying or relying on user ignorance of the issues. These two means of ensuring ethical corporate behavior are however a good place to start and should be coupled with greater education of users and how their data is being used by corporations. 

### Comparison

The two proposed methods are, in many ways, closely tied in the realm of correcting unethical corporate behavior. When comparing the two directly, it is easiest to view the first method as a preventative measure before the second becomes more of a problem. By not allowing companies to become monopolies, users’ data is inherently safer by effectively limiting the ways companies can misuse it. Additionally, the rise of these massive tech companies has led to an age where data is king; by regulating the size of companies, not only does the chance of data misuse decrease, but the amount of private data collected also decreases. Moreover, the first proposed method serves as a general positive by allowing new companies, ideas, and technologies to flourish fairly under the United States’ capitalist principles. The second method is more specifically concerned with tech companies and limiting the potential harm that they can cause with data.

It is interesting to observe that the first proposed method would benefit those on the business side and the second method would benefit those on the consumer side. Both issues discussed could theoretically be fixed through the companies acting properly and safely, but realistically need to be addressed by implementing suggested fixes through legislation. Even if the companies were acting in the public's’ best interest, users would probably be safer in the end with an extra measure of government regulation. Despite companies lobbying directly against these proposed methods, both proposals are not meant to disrupt the growth of any companies; legislation would be put in place only to ensure competitive fairness and, above all, increase consumer safety. 

### Conclusion

According to the  Care Ethics Ethical Framework,  the proposal that is most favorable in addressing the issue of monopolies in companies would be to make tech giants require portability and interoperability of user data as opposed to breaking up and separating the companies in question (like Youtube and Google). Our framework would say that giving the users/customers power over the data that these companies have over them would build a greater sense of trust and openness with these companies. If the users believed that these companies were using their data for nefarious reasons, they could see exactly what they are tracking and make the decision if they want to maintain the relationship with the company or sever it. This power given to the user would entice these companies to promote healthy relationships with their customers through their practices. Finally, this proposal would make it so that you must share data with competitors, this opens up to possibility of collaboration and partnerships with previous competitors which has a potential to build relationships with them. Overall this proposal is seen as more favorable than breaking up companies as it emphasizes the power of the customer and builds a sense of trust, strengthening the company-customer relationship.
 
## Proposal to Enforce Corporate Social Responsibility

The Ethics of Care framework is centered around relationships that involve a vulnerable party. So, to reinforce Corporate Social Responsibility, we propose an approach that examines the position of power the corporation holds and what parties are affected by them. After determining this, we will hold companies accountable by evaluating the impact they have on these relationships and whether it is positive or negative. To hold companies accountable, we will call on governments to impose penalties for corporations that abuse these relationships and policies that continuously monitor companies to make sure they currently are not abusing relationships. Along with this, we will try to publish as much information about the social impact companies have on different parties.

Companies have a lot of power in the world, and more so in the United States. In many cases, masses of people rely on and are at the mercy of these companies. For instance, many people rely on different medications and equipment that pharmaceutical and biotech companies produce. If they were not able to get these products for whatever reason, their livelihood could be greatly impacted. Along with customers that rely on their products, companies have a lot of power to influence governmental policy. Many industries form special interest groups that try to push forward their agenda. In this way, companies can shape how the country and the world operates, impacting millions, if not billions of people.

We would consider corporations to abuse these relationships if they use their power to benefit themselves by hurting the people in these relationships. Going back to the pharmaceutical example, there have been cases in the past where corporations have drastically increased the price of medications, not because producing the medications cost increased, but to increase their profit. We would consider this irresponsible. We would call on policy to punish a company like this. Along with that, we would create a social media campaign exposing what the company did and highlight some of the individuals it hurt. In fact, this response has happened several times. In terms of special interest groups, if a company were to lobby for a policy that would hurt vulnerable people solely out of their business interests, we would consider this irresponsible. We would call for policy that limits how much a special interest group can influence legislation that is passed. Along with this, we would try to publish as much information about what companies support lobbying for what legislation, tying corporations to specific policies.

Overall, our approach aims to highlight the effects corporations’ actions to increase profits have on the relationships they have with vulnerable parties. Often times, the phrase “that’s just business” is meant to devalue these relationships. However, our proposal would try to change this culture to actually emphasize these relationships. 

To show how our proposed solution would correct unethical behavior, we will look at the Equifax hack. The Equifax hack refers to the 2017 data breach that leaked hundreds of millions of Americans personal information, including names, social security numbers and addresses. Negligence and carelessness were two of the reported reasons for the breach.

Equifax’s has a major position of power, even compared to other huge corporations. As a Credit Reporting Agency, they have data and information about millions of people, some of whom did not even sign up for Equifax. So, they basically have relationships with every person in the country. The information is extremely sensitive as well. Losing a Social Security number could lead to a stolen identity, major headaches and loss of life savings. Equifax’s carelessness and negligence can be attributed to corporate irresponsibility, which may have resulted from incompetent executives or to raise the bottom line. Regardless, the lack of resources geared towards security had a reason that benefited the company, at the expense of the other parties involved. Our proposal would push for governmental policies that would significantly penalize a company that does this, preventing companies in the future from doing it again. We would also support policies that create watchdogs to make sure that companies are adhering to the standard. We would also call Equifax to have a public hearing about what they have done to fix the issues that resulted in the breach.

## Resources

[https://www.cnet.com/news/equifaxs-hack-one-year-later-a-look-back-at-how-it-happened-and-whats-changed/](https://www.cnet.com/news/equifaxs-hack-one-year-later-a-look-back-at-how-it-happened-and-whats-changed/)

[https://www.theverge.com/2018/9/5/17805162/monopoly-antitrust-regulation-google-amazon-uber-facebook](https://www.theverge.com/2018/9/5/17805162/monopoly-antitrust-regulation-google-amazon-uber-facebook)

[https://techcrunch.com/2018/02/21/the-sec-says-companies-must-disclose-more-information-about-cybersecurity-risks/](https://techcrunch.com/2018/02/21/the-sec-says-companies-must-disclose-more-information-about-cybersecurity-risks/)

[https://swirled.com/facebook-user-data-breach/](https://swirled.com/facebook-user-data-breach/)

[https://www.economist.com/briefing/2018/01/20/the-techlash-against-amazon-facebook-and-google-and-what-they-can-do](https://www.economist.com/briefing/2018/01/20/the-techlash-against-amazon-facebook-and-google-and-what-they-can-do)

# Website Post 2

## H-1B Visas

One of the biggest arguments of the H-1B visa system is that it allows workers from other countries to work in the United States for American companies. According to the USCIS H-1B general requirements, these foreign employees must be highly skilled workers who have a Bachelor's degree or equivalent education or training. This essentially means that the program allows for high-skilled workers to come into the US and fill roles that are highly in demand, essentially combatting local talent shortages especially in the tech industry that is booming.  While under the H-1B visa the worker can apply for permanent residency in the US, which creates a path for foreign nationals to become US citizens if they so wish.  Another argument in favor of the H-1B visa system is that these holders typically become small business owners and job creators, who drive innovation and help build the US economy. Finally, the last arguments for the H-1B visa system is that it allows companies to hire workers with a wider range of upbringings, experiences, and perspectives essentially creating diversity in their company.  

The biggest argument against the H-1B visa is that these workers are getting taken advantage of by the companies that hire them. IEEE-USA points out in the article titled “Commentary: The H-1B Visa Problem as IEEE-USA Sees It” that  Smartorg pays software engineers on H-1B visas in Menlo Park only $80,000 annually, which is a ridiculously low salary for the San Jose region, compared to Facebook's $138,294. As a consequence, companies can hire the same level of talent for a cheaper rate, which some argue takes jobs away from American Workers. People see the H-1B as a tool used by companies to avoid hiring American workers and avoid paying American wages. In addition to this, employees cannot obtain an H-1B visa unless they are sponsored by an employer. The employer must typically cover any legal fees required to process their sponsorship if they even acquire an H-1B visa as there is a limited number of them available. In addition to this, in the article, “Engineers Are Leaving Trump’s America for the Canadian Dream” having a H-1B visa comes with a lot of uncertainty as an employer can fire their employee and take away their right to be in the country, creating significant stress. As a result, many of these workers apply for green cards, but as the article states, many have been waiting “a decade or more for their green cards and still don't have them”.

Applying Care Ethics to the H-1B visas situation is somewhat complicated. On one hand, the emphasis on relationships could lead one to believe that this ethical framework would employ a “more is better” policy, and simply take as many visas as citizens of other countries require. Despite being unfeasible from a logistics standpoint, followers of Care Ethics would be hesitant to take visas due to the several aforementioned current flaws with the system; a valid question being “Is it really better to take in everyone if they might be exploited, treated unfairly, and generally not cared for as well as US citizens?”. Ultimately, our ethical of framework would have a lot to change on both sides -- that is, how many H-1B visas are allowed and the employer-employee dynamic with visa workers -- of the controversy as it is currently.

First, Ethics of Care would suggest that visas should be easier to obtain. This way, those looking to come to the United States could fulfill their dream, jobs would get filled within companies, but, most importantly, relationships could flourish and continue to give people new perspectives into the lives of others around the world. This way, when both the people receiving visas and their employers/coworkers move forward in life, they can take their new, more worldly points of view into future relationships and actions. In order for both parties to benefit, both sides of process must change. This means it should be quicker for a person to receive a green card, or they should be provided more benefits during their visa duration. Additionally, employers should get an easier time trying to bring on/sponsor a citizen of another country. 

Second, Care Ethics would not tolerate the current exploitation of visa workers. Companies getting employees with visas can be good, but getting those employees just to avoid paying a standard industry wage is not okay. Furthermore, workers with visas need to receive more benefits, rights, and/or guarantees concerning their status as employees in the US. If a company has all the power over their visa worker(s), it can take advantage and abuse in its relationships. Ethics of Care would suggest that all employees do the same work be paid the same, since that seems like the most practical and fair way to maintain and grow relationships.

With these fundamental changes to the state of visas in the US, followers of Ethics of Care would be big proponents of the H-1B visa system. 

## Google Internal Memeo

The internal Google memo that was circulating inside the company in 2017 received much backlash both from inside the company and out. The employee who wrote it was eventually fired and his ideas dismissed. The memo actually addressed several different issues that the author wanted to bring up. The author discussed the idea that left and   ideals have a difference of opinion on when it comes to disparities like a gender gap. The author says that left ideals hold that gaps like this are because of injustices while right ideals would say that these gaps are natural. The author goes on to say that instead of bias against women in tech, their biology simply makes working in tech not an appealing place for women. Finally, the author lists some things Google might do in order to close the gender gap that are not, in the author’s opinion, discriminatory as some of their other initiatives are such as classes only for a certain race/gender. The author makes his viewpoint very clear by constantly referring to many of the diversity and inclusion practices that Google employes as discriminatory. As to who is being discriminated by these practices the authors never explicitly states but it can be implied that it is white men.

In terms of the ethics of care, most of the arguments presented by the author would absolutely be morally bad, there are a few points in the memo through that the ethics of care might agree with. The first of these points is the idea that is presented in the memo that in order to close the gender gap we could institute programs such that make tech industries more appealing to women. The Ethics of Care came about trying to come up with a system of ethics that appeals more to women, by instituting programs that both are good for the business but also help women relate to the company by being more compassionate, more people oriented, and more focused on how women work and what a woman wants out of a job. Going off of this the Ethics of Care might also acknowledge that men and women do indeed have some difference in traits as a whole and when trying to close the gender gap these traits should be taken into account. 

In contrast, the Ethics of Care would have a lot of issues with many of the the viewpoints put forward in the memo. One of the main issues the Ethics of Care would have is that the author says in order to make unbiased decisions one should leave feelings out of the decision. The Ethics of Care would consider this to be terrible as caring for others is a central part of the Ethical System.  In order for one to evaluate how ethical something is one must consider how one is caring for others and caring for oneself. In this same line of thinking, the author saying that programs that help traditionally underrepresented people are discriminatory would not be in line with the Ethics of care as they are not caring about those underrepresented people and this line of thought doesn’t take into account why these programs exist. A person following the Ethics of Care would see that these programs are needed because for some reason or another these people are underrepresented and need care. Finally one of the final points that the Author raises that the Ethics of Care would take issue with is the idea that gender issues should be demoralized, gender issues deal with people and relationships so by definition the Ethics of Care would say that gender issues absolutely fall under morality and should be thought of as such.  In closing the Google Memo is clearly a very polarizing topic and it helps to examine it in the ways that we have here to fully understand its context and its goals. 

## Analysis of Gender Bias in Tech

There are several issues concerning gender affecting the technology industry today. First, as it stands, the male to female ratio in technology jobs, which some studies say is 80/20, does not reflect the population ratio, which is roughly 50/50. This is a very complex issue and there are a few ideas as to why it exists. The leading theory is that, from a young age, across a population, boys and girls are implicitly pushed towards certain career paths. Generations and generations of gender roles have created these perceptions. Seeing mostly men in technological roles creates a perception that tech. jobs are more suited for men than women. Others take the point of view that, due to evolution, men are physically more suited for jobs in technology than women and that is why this gender gap exists. This is the nature versus nurture debate. A few years ago, an internal Google memo supporting this viewpoint challenged diversity and minority programs at technology companies and created a lot of controversy throughout the technology industry. 

Another Gender issue is sexual harassment. In a recent article, CNN outlined the stories of several women who have been harassed in the tech industry. In some instances, Venture Capitalists and investors used their positions of power to sexually harass female entrepreneurs. Because they had the power to withdraw funding from the entrepreneur's company, they were able to get away with extremely inappropriate behavior. This is a result of both the major gender gap in the industry and extreme amounts of money creating major power imbalances.

To respond to the first issue about the gender gap, the Ethics of Care framework would support the theory that it is due to historical gender roles. Feminist Ethics and the Ethics of Care were created in response to the perceived gender bias in traditional ethical frameworks. Furthermore, Ethics of Care would call on women in technology roles to develop relationships with young girls and women and help show them that they are able to be successful in the field if they want to. This does not necessarily just need to be between an adult and a child. For instance, an executive helping a recent graduate would be important as well. These relationships are what the Ethics of Care is based on. Eventually, these relationships would bring more women into technology, reducing the common perception that tech. jobs are more suited for men and close the gender gap.

In response to the problem with sexual misconduct, Ethics of Care would suggest that it is the responsibility of everyone in the environment to actively and vocally not tolerate that type of behavior. In order to preserve relationships with female coworkers and all other females, people would need to stand up for them or else damage their relationships. Tolerating sexual assault in a single instance contributes to a culture of tolerance, which will impact all the females around someone. Lastly, it is important to note that these issues will not be solved overnight. Changing a culture takes a lot of time and will require patience and persistence. However, forming strong relationships and taking on these issues as a group will help strengthen these traits and push progress forward.

## Analysis of Race and Ethnicity Issues in Tech

In the technology field, particularly in the scope of computer science, there without a doubt exists a bias towards race and ethnicity. In terms of race and ethnicity, majorly underrepresented groups, both on the academic level and in the professional field, include people of African, Hispanic, or Native American heritage, as well as international people. Among other issues, people who identify with these ethnicities and backgrounds have been reported to feel isolated or unrepresented in the technology field as a whole, which in turn has created a severe lack a diversity and variance of perspectives.
 
One of the biggest areas where this problem persists is in education. According to research studies, black students are less likely to have the opportunity to take computer science classes in school, and furthermore, black and Hispanic students are less likely than white students to have access to computers at home. These small examples, combined with a plethora of related research one can find online, point to a culture in which students of certain races and ethnicities have not received the opportunities that would help to inspire future computer science studies. This issue is only exacerbated when looking at the diversity of computer science majors, where the groups discussed here only make up a fraction of students pursuing a computer science degree at the university level.
 
A related issue that highlights a lack of ethnic diversity in the tech field can be observed from the professional field, in which minorities are likewise underrepresented. While this can be seen as the result of the issues existing in the education process, as discussed above, these deficiencies are nevertheless prominent. The way in which tech companies recruit students is something that has seriously affected the makeup of the workforce in the tech industry.  Similarly, the dominance of people who identify as white, including in the workforce but especially in upper-level management, has certainly also contributed to the problem.
 
Although the Ethics of Care framework does not have a clear-cut solution to lessening and ultimately eliminating biases towards race and ethnicity in the tech field, one can nevertheless apply its principles to this complex issue. In terms of education, when one considers a loving and caring relationship, it is beyond doubt that the parties involved in this relationship both would wish the best for each other. As a result, Ethics of Care would promote the encouragement of pursuing whatever interests best suit and benefit a given person. If someone truly cares for another, then this person would help a fellow friend achieve the highest success possible, regardless of race or ethnicity. If someone we care about expresses an affinity for the tech field, we must foster this passion, so as to strengthen our caring relationship with this person.
 
Similarly, the professional field can be strengthened by an uptake in ethnic diversity, which would certainly promote unique and diverse relationships. Part of caring for others entails including all people, and in terms of the professional field, this would manifest itself in the recruitment of all people, with the goal of creating a workforce comprising of diverse-minded, intelligent, and hard-working people. Ultimately, the inclusion of all people is tantamount to caring for others, so Ethics of Care is undoubtedly pertinent to the issues regarding race and ethnicity in today’s tech world.

## Resources

[https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/temporary-workers/h-1b-specialty-occupations-dod-cooperative-research-and-development-project-workers-and-fashion-models](https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/temporary-workers/h-1b-specialty-occupations-dod-cooperative-research-and-development-project-workers-and-fashion-models)

[https://spectrum.ieee.org/view-from-the-valley/at-work/tech-careers/commentary-the-h1b-problem-as-ieeeusa-sees-it](https://spectrum.ieee.org/view-from-the-valley/at-work/tech-careers/commentary-the-h1b-problem-as-ieeeusa-sees-it)

[https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-04-20/h-1b-workers-are-leaving-trump-s-america-for-the-canadian-dream](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-04-20/h-1b-workers-are-leaving-trump-s-america-for-the-canadian-dream)

[https://money.cnn.com/technology/sexual-harassment-tech/](https://money.cnn.com/technology/sexual-harassment-tech/)

[https://smallbiztrends.com/2018/03/women-in-technology-statistics.html](https://smallbiztrends.com/2018/03/women-in-technology-statistics.html)

[https://www.stanforddaily.com/2015/01/16/addressing-ethnic-diversity-in-computer-science/](https://www.stanforddaily.com/2015/01/16/addressing-ethnic-diversity-in-computer-science/)

[https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-howard-university-coders/](https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-howard-university-coders/)

[https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2016/10/18/google-gallup-computer-science-girls-blacks-hispanics/92335498/](https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2016/10/18/google-gallup-computer-science-girls-blacks-hispanics/92335498/)




# Website Post 1

## Statement Of Purpose

### What Makes An Action Ethical According to the Ethics of Care?

To evaluate actions with the Ethics of Care framework, one must look at how the action affects the person performing the action and the people that are being cared for by that person. If an action ignores the well-being of either of those two parties, it is unethical. However, if both parties’ interests are met, the action is ethical. Furthermore, the relationships that are impacted by the action should be evaluated. In the framework, relationships are between unequal parties. For example, a parent and a child. Because one’s moral development is defined by the relationships that they are involved in, actions that sever relationships are unethical and actions that strengthen relationships are ethical. In summation, the Ethics of Care framework emphasizes maintaining and strengthening connections to others, as well as protecting the interests of those involved, as a collective unit.

### What triggers the need to evaluate how ethical an action is?

With the framework of Care Ethics in mind, actions must be evaluated for how ethical they are when these actions impact those we care about or are connected to. The Ethics of Care emphasizes the connections to others and maintaining those connections, as well as protecting the interests of those involved, as a collective unit. When making decisions that affect others, we must be mindful of how ethical our decision will be. In this way when some action impacts a relationship between any two parties the ethics of care would ask one to step in and evalute how ethical the action is. This can be many different kinds of relationships including by not limited to: company and customer, employer and developer, and developer and customer.  


### What predisposition do people have to act ethically according to the Ethics of Care?

According to the ethics of care, the predisposition people have to act ethically is influenced by gender. Men are predisposed to act in an ethical manner according to abstract ideas of justice and duty, whereas women act ethically according to ideas of empathy and compassion. Because ethics and what one deems to be ethical is rooted in a moral system, men and women are predisposed to acting ethically with regard to their respective moral systems.  This idea is essential to the ethics of care as its founder, Carol Gilligan, sought to make clear that men and women have distinct understandings of morality which influence the way in which they respond to ethics and behaving ethically.

### Issues in technology that the Ethics of Care would say much about

The ethics of care have a lot to say about in many different issues in computer technology. 

1.	Software and Users 
	Many computer technology companies, especially social network platforms do not preserve and protect the rights and information of the users. According to the ethics of care, this information should be held responsible by the software companies and realize the vulnerability of the users. Users should be treated with care and respect and therefore companies should follow through with their responsibilities and actively prevent users’ information to be stolen.

2.	User Experience
	The user experience that is provided to different users must be speculated and paid special attention to. It has been an issue that many female users have reported their gender identity were being insulted in their experience interacting with certain software, or information provided by users. These software companies are accountable for their messages and should respect different genders, races, and disabilities. Many companies have refined their actions, such as providing emojis of different gender and races, designing their interface catering to users with color vision deficiencies.

3.	In the Workplace
	At workspaces, especially in computer technology working environment, there is a gender imbalance between male and female engineers and often times female engineers are being disrespected. The ethics of care emphasizes protecting the interests and rights of all genders and races and employers should address such issues and provide female engineers with equal opportunities and respect. Administrators of different workspaces should also acknowledge details of minority workers and providing them with a good working environment and the care they needed.

## Ethics of Care and IEEE Code of Conduct

When comparing the IEEE code of ethics with the ethical framework laid out by Ethics of Care, one can observe that the IEEE does partly focus on the relationship of professionals to the public and to fellow colleagues. This notion of relationship to others is something on which Ethics of Care places great emphasis. This similarity can especially be seen in points one and eight of the IEEE code of ethics, which concern the general welfare of the public and the treatment of other persons, respectively. Likewise, points nine and ten stress the importance of proper and professional behavior in relation to the public and colleagues. 


On the other hand, there does indeed exist certain differences between the two, mainly in the overall goal of the respective schools of thought. In the IEEE code of ethics, a distinctly professional diction is used, and one can see this focus in lines such as “to maintain and improve our technical competence and to undertake technological tasks”. In addition to this, IEEE outlines broad guidelines for proper behavior in the technical field, as well as how to deal with emerging technologies. Ethics of Care, however, is far more concerned with personal relationships, rather than providing a guideline to ethical behavior in a professional sense. On this note, a major difference between the IEEE code of ethics and Ethics of Care lies in the fact the IEEE provided a very general framework in its code, while Ethics of Care emphasizes a much narrower scope, attempting to focus on the very important aspect of human interaction.


The most notable missing part from the IEEE code of ethics with regards to incorporating the Ethics of Care is a sense of care and benevolence between professionals in the technical field and clients, or those who are recipients of the goods, services, etc. This sense of a caring relationship between people can certainly also be applied between peers in the field. If the IEEE code of ethics were to add a few points to guide the nature of ethical relationships within the field, then it would undoubtedly be more in line with the Ethics of Care.

## Ethics of Care and ACM Code of Conduct

The ACM code of ethics is almost entirely geared towards applying ethics towards a variety of professions, such as providing guidelines for those in a higher up occupation so as to not abuse their power against their employees. An ethicist following the ethics of care would be in opposition to the pure purpose of this code of ethics, primarily due to the fact that it is still encouraging for those in power to view their employees as subordinates and simply do not abuse them, while an ethicist of care would argue that employees should be seen as equals and that the primary focus should be building a relationship with them. Hence, this is a key difference between the two systems. Another difference is the fact that the ACM code of ethics emphasizes that the “central concerns” of computing work are “the public good” and “high quality”, while ethics of care based system would argue that relationships between both customer and company as well as inter-employee relations should be the key focus. However, both of these ethical guidelines do have similarities, particularly in the fact that the ACM still does stress that professionals still need to care for their employees and treat them with respect. Also, the ACM states that all its professionals should” Articulate, encourage acceptance of, and evaluate fulfillment of social responsibilities by members of the organization or group”, which in turn also encourages for people to build relationships inside of their own organization to hopefully improve the quality of the group. The ACM code of ethics, though, still could learn from the ideologies of Ethics of Care, maybe by adding a few more points stressing the fact that both professional and friendly relationships between professionals should be encouraged as it helps people to grow and have a more enjoyable life.

## Ethics of Care and ICCP Code of Conduct

There are a number of notable similarities between Ethics of Care and the ICCP Code of Ethics. As Ethics of Care stresses the importance of relationships, one could look to the ICCP’s Code of Ethics’ Code of Conduct section. Specifically, the subsections on Integrity (2.5), Accountability (2.7), and Protection of Privacy (2.8) all particularly align with some principles of Ethics of Care. Integrity in a hypothetical relationship of ICCP members works both ways -- employers should not take advantage of their employees, and employees should be upfront with their employers. Accountability requires competence and responsibility, both integral in Ethics of Care. Last, for Protection of Privacy, the trust of both parties is essential for relationships, so there is quite a bit of overlap between the code and Care Ethics. 


Despite the many similarities, there are differences between the Ethics of Care framework and the ICCP Code of Ethics. For example, there are large parts of the ICCP’s Code of Ethics concerning how a member may lose their status, which seems to directly conflict with the fundamentals of Care Ethics (by limiting relationships). Additionally, a lot of the guidelines seem to exist as reminders of professional and societal obligations. In fact, the word “obligation” appears 3 times in the first 4 sentences of the ICCP Code of Ethics. Ethics of Care, on the other hand, stress the difference between obligation and responsibility, claiming that obligations are limited to socially constructed roles while responsibilities aren’t. 


This difference between words could actually be expanded to address how the ICCP Code of Ethics could improve by taking from Care Ethics. Where Ethics of Care is about the personal, the ICCP Code of Ethics is about the professional. If the ICCP were to expand their Code to include more on the interpersonal connections in the work environment, they could address this missing area. 



