---
layout: subpage
title: Legalist Ethics
image: css/yang.png
subpage: true
coursepage: false
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/ethical-computing-institute/css/legalist.css">

## “If in a country there are the following ten evils: rites, music, odes, history, virtue, moral culture, filial piety, brotherly duty, integrity and sophistry, the ruler cannot make the people fight and dismemberment is inevitable; and this brings extinction in its train.”
### - Shang Yang, *The Book of Lord Shang*


# Blog Post 1 (1/24/19)

## Statement of Purpose

### What makes an action ethical?
The recommended structure in the legalist ethical framework is a highly centralized government in which the ruler retains firm control of the “two handles” of government, which are punishment and favor. In this ethical framework, the people are guided by clear edicts and strong punishments rather than a sense of shame. Therefore, an action is considered ethical if it abides by the law that the ruler has drawn up and put into place. An example of ethical behavior in this framework would include farmers who were rewarded if they exceeded their quotas for the year. In this case, unethical behavior would occur if a farmer underperformed their quota and became enslaved as their punishment. The quota was put in place by the ruler for farmers to follow, which corresponds with the framework; the ruler makes edicts, and the people obey.

### What triggers the need to evaluate how ethical an action is?
The need to evaluate how ethical an action is the maintenance of a structurally sound society or group. The objective of a legalist society is to create and maintain rules to determine if each action is right or wrong. When new rules are added or different actions that do not fall into the current rules occur, the government needs to ensure that it will maintain in control.

### What is each person's ethical predisposition?
According to the legalist ethical framework, people who abide by the laws enforced by the ruler will be rewarded, and those who do not abide by the laws will be punished. In almost all cases people would prefer being rewarded, or favored, over being punished and we think this alone would cause people to act ethically. In this framework people will choose to act with obedience to the law based on the fear of punishment they could suffer from if they chose to act immorally. People will also choose to follow the law based on the favor they could receive from their ruler, or government. The framework assumes that people cannot be trusted to act ethically on their own, and must be guided by law.

### What are some relevant technological issues?
#### Privacy vs. Security 
Especially following the Snowden leaks, debates over privacy versus security have risen to the forefront. Government surveillance can potentially prevent crimes and catch perpetrators, but at the cost of privacy. Under a legalistic framework,  privacy is irrelevant unless it contributes to the state’s authority, but security is a very important issue. One of the founders of legalism, Shang Yang, implemented a mutual spying system (peer review, as its known today), with the goal of keeping citizens in check. It is certain that under a legalistic framework, statewide surveillance would be applauded as a necessary measure to maintain control.

#### Copyright Law
Copyright is the legal right that the creator of an intellectual property owns the rights to their intellectual property. However, with fair use in place, it is possible that other parties may take and use these works protected by copyright as their own, so long as it transforms the original source in some way. This can be done by way of critique, parody, or research. Outside of the Legalistic framework, debates arise around whether one work is a valid transformation, especially in the world of parody. With regard to Legalism, fair use would be essential - even if only for the sake of news broadcasting - so there would be clear and strict guidelines for what would fall into these categories. If one were to violate these rules, they would be forced to remove their content as well as be fined - for the revenue lost to the original creator and for breaking the law.

#### Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrency is highly unstable, with the amount of available currency defined by the creator of a blockchain and the current value based on the number of miners and trust in that currency. It is likely that under a legalistic framework, cryptocurrency’s instability would be unethical. A blockchain cannot be regulated or controlled by a single entity without an enormous amount of resources, and cannot be easily updated or overwritten. Power is placed in the hands of individuals on the blockchain network, which weakens the control of any government over the currency. A legalistic system would ban blockchain currency, since there are too many unknowns, no control, and no stability.


## Response to the [IEEE Code of Ethics](https://www.ieee.org/about/corporate/governance/p7-8.html "IEEE Code of Ethics")
The focus of the IEEE code is on prescribing general rules for members to follow. The language is ambiguous, and no punishments are listed (there is the implicit idea that membership to the IEEE depends on following the code of ethics, but there is no explicit punishment). Our framework prescribes unambiguous rules and harsh punishments. Additionally, the burden is placed on individual members of the IEEE to follow the code of ethics, whereas the moral burden is solely placed on the ruler of a state (possibly, by extension, a corporation or group). If individuals act immorally, that is the “fault” of the ruler for not providing clear guidelines and strict punishments.

The IEEE states the need for the code is “in recognition of the importance of our technologies in affecting the quality of life throughout the world”. The need for legalist ethics stems from the chaotic environment of the “Warring States” period, which, like technology, prompted an ethical debate.

The focus on public good does have similarities to legalism, in that there is supposed to be a widespread benefit to following the code of ethics, and that this good is not for the benefit of the individual. Although the moral burden is placed on individuals in the IEEE and only the state in legalism, both attempt to make a difference on a widespread scale.

Some missing portions of the IEEE code are the ambiguity and lack of punishments, as previously mentioned. The ambiguous language, while allowing for flexible interpretation, makes it difficult to apply in specific situations. One of the main goals of legalism was to provide specific rules and guidelines for all situations, making it relatively easy to make a decision. The lack of punishments may lead readers to conclude that there is no incentive for following the IEEE code of ethics, while there is no such doubt in a legalistic framework.

## Response to the [ACM Code of Ethics](https://ethics.acm.org/code-of-ethics/ "ACM Code of Ethics")
Legalism is only successfully implemented if harsh punishments are attached to violations of clear edicts. What is notably absent from each of these code of ethics, including ACM’s, is punishments for violations of its tenets. ACM’s code does mention that violations of the code may result in membership being revoked (4.2), but it is not clear what type of violation would result in this outcome. Another departure from legalism can be found in the implicit belief of the code that members are guided by some sort of virtue ethic; however, legalism denies that humans can be consistently motivated by unselfish or nonmaterial desires. Therefore, tenets such as 1.3 and 1.4, which require members to practice fairness and honesty of their own accord, are inert without corresponding punishments for failing to uphold them. Finally, in ACM’s code there is placed special emphasis on ensuring privacy and confidentiality in professional dealings, while in legalism this may not be so crucial if it were to impede progress or the realization of goals.   

While there are many clear differences between ACM’s code of ethics and the practice of legalism, there are a few commonalities. Both can be thought to have a similar guiding imperative: to ensure the public good. This is stated numerous times throughout the ACM code, most explicitly in 1.1 and 3.1. Also similar to legalism is that the code of ethics encourages members to operate within the boundaries of their roles (2.6 and 2.8). Legalism is especially adherent to this principle, even punishing beneficial or over-and-above work if it is outside the defined role of the individual. As has been made clear so far, legalism is only maintained with an organized and strict set of rules followed by everyone at each level of the hierarchy. Tenet 2.3 calls for this, requiring members to “know and respect existing rules.”  


## Response to the [ICCP Code of Ethics](https://www.iccp.org/code-of-ethics.html "ICCP Code of Ethics")
Though the principles of Legalism do not closely comport with the ICCP Code of Ethics, there are some similarities. Broadly speaking, both are concerned with a collective public good, although in different ways. Along these lines, both encourage attitudes of service Legalism emphasizing service of the state and the ICCP suggesting pro bono work (1.1). Likewise, both expect high quality of work in service of their respective understandings of the common good (2.1). Both the ICCP and Legalist thinkers have an expectation that workers will follow the laws that govern them (2.3). The ICCP outlines an expectation of system security in section 2.9 and this corresponds with Legalism’s goal of a strong state. Finally, just as Legalism encourages subjects to monitor one another, the ICCP expects its members to do the same through peer review (2.4) and by reporting violations (4.2).

While both Legalism and the ICCP base their principles in a concept of a collective good, these concepts differ in important ways. While Legalism’s core principle is the strength and stability of the state itself, the ICCP maintains a concept of individual human rights and dignity (2.1, 3.3). Along with this dignity comes with an expectation of autonomy and personal privacy (1.1, 1.6), both of which contradict the Legalist philosophy. Along similar lines, the ICCP guidelines promote respect for creators and their intellectual properties (1.5) whereas Legalists would almost certainly expect all technology to come under the control of the state. Another difference appears in section 1.1 when the ICCP Code outlines its expectation of respect for diversity and preferential treatment for the disadvantaged; Legalism has no such interest in individual identity. Finally, while the ICCP recognizes that failures can occur mistakenly and allows workers to take responsibility for their errors, Legalism punishes even unintentional flaws to threaten onlookers through displays of power.

One thing that Legalism has that the ICCP neglects is a system of punishment. While the ICCP’s code is thorough in its description of appropriate behavior, it does not address any possibility for punitive action. Where the ICCP seems toothless, Legalism is anything but. The historical example of punishing unproductive farmers with slavery shows an extreme willingness to judge and punish. The ICCP probably does not wish to be so vindictive, but they may be able to replicate the Legalist system on a smaller, more merciful scale.



# Blog Post 2 (1/31/19)
## H-1B Visas
### Arguments For
- Clear rules to follow, for the employer and the employee. If these rules are to be broken while the H-1B worker is employed, there will be consequences for the offending party.
  - If the employee breaks the rules (presiding American laws), they will be punished by having their visa revoked and deported to their home country.
  - If the employer breaks the rules (unfair wages, assigning out of scope work, etc), they can be reported, fined, and disqualified from applying for H-1B workers for 2 years.
- Employees are encouraged to report such violations to create a more fair system for current and prospective workers.
- Thorough vetting process, ensuring that all employees are fit for the job and can bring the best for American interests
- If employees have skills that meet the criteria, they can generate revenue for the state and increase the total potential for the state's power.
- Employer generates more money for corporate tax, employee becomes part of local economy

If the H-1B visa system is followed as it is outlined, it is a benefit for the state. Any infractions can be reported and dealt with accordingly, discouraging behavior that would damage the visa system, and in turn the state. The H-1B visa system has potential to act in accordance with the legalist framework in theory.


### Arguments Against
Many of the arguments against the H-1B visa system expose how the system is currently being abused. The first argument is that the visas are not going to the most highly trained workers. The H-1B visa system is supposed to provide a pathway to bring the most highly skilled workers into the United States. This is not the case, however. At Tata Consultancy, Cognizant Technology, and Infosys, the three companies with the most employees with H-1B visas, 80% of visa holders only have a bachelor’s degree. Of the 85,000 visas available each year, only 20,000 are reserved for people with advanced degrees. For the remaining 65,000 spots, a lottery systems is used. There is no prioritization within the lottery system, so many people with advanced degrees end up not getting a visa. It is often argued that the workers that come in with H-1B visas fill a skill gap, but it is unlikely that this is the case since most of these workers only have bachelor’s degrees. If there was a lack of qualified American workers to fill these positions, the use of the visa system in this way could be validated, but this is, again, not the case. Only half of U.S. college graduates who receive a STEM degree get a job in the STEM field. Specifically in computer and information science and in engineering, U.S. colleges graduate 50 percent more students than are hired into those fields each year.

Another argument against the H-1B visa system is that it can be abused to allow companies to import cheap labor. The system allows companies to hire non-American workers and pay them non-American wages. Although some companies pay their H-1B employees a fair salary that is equivalent to their American coworkers, many companies, such as outsourcing and consulting companies, do not. For every visa used by Google to hire a talented non-American for $126,000, ten Americans are replaced by outsourcing companies paying their H-1B workers $65,000. Wipro, a large outsourcing company, paid its 104 program analysts in San Jose exactly $60,000 each in 2016.  Brocade, in contrast, paid their programmer analysts $130,000 in the same city. Not only does this impact the foreign workers looking for a job in the United States, it also affects American workers. Results from a study to examine how H-1B visa holders affect the economy shows that the wages and employment rate of American computer scientists were lower due to the influx of workers with a H-1B visa.

Sources:
- https://spectrum.ieee.org/view-from-the-valley/at-work/tech-careers/commentary-the-h1b-problem-as-ieeeusa-sees-it
- https://hbr.org/2017/05/the-h-1b-visa-debate-explained
- https://money.cnn.com/2017/02/21/technology/h1b-visa-program-flawed/
- https://www.nber.org/papers/w23153


### Legalist Response
When deciding whether the application of the H-1B system is unethical, legalism would return to legislative documents such as the Constitution or previous cases involving the matter. If neither of these provide insight, then a judgment could be made on whether H-1B visas act as a stabilizing influence and increase the power of the central government or not. According to the [U.S Department of Labor](https://www.dol.gov/whd/immigration/h1b.htm):

Employers must attest to the Department of Labor that they will pay wages to the H-1B nonimmigrant workers that are at least equal to the actual wage paid by the employer to other workers with similar experience and qualifications for the job in question, or the prevailing wage for the occupation in the area of intended employment – whichever is greater
This statement is a product of the H-1B Visa Reform Act of 2004, which, among other things, stated that employers must pay workers at least 100% the prevailing wage. Although normally legalism would seem to take an anti-foreigner stance, the legal precedent already set by this legislation means that H-1B workers must be paid at least the same as other workers, and it is worse to violate the current law than to hire foreign workers for cheap labor or mistreat them. This means paying these workers less than others is an ethical violation of our framework, in line with a legal violation.


## Google Internal Memo
### Summary
In mid-2017 an internal memo titled “Google’s Ideological Echo Chamber” circulated around Google after it was published by a male software engineer.  The article explains the engineer’s personal opinions regarding diversity issues in technology and contains several main ideas.  First, the memo argues that differences in representation in industry fields related to technology (specifically software engineering) between men and women are a result of biological and personality differences between the genders and not a result of bias.  Second, it argues that Google has a political bias that sees freedom of offense as equivalent to psychological safety and thus suppresses opinions that differ from its progressive agenda.  Lastly, it argues that Google’s suppression of opinion has resulted in the view that all differences in representation are due to oppression and that the only way to fight oppression is through discrimination.

The memo goes on to give a number of suggestions as to how these presented problems could be solved.  The main premise of these suggestions is that non-progressive opinions, which are the minority within Google, should not be suppressed.  This would encourage a discussion which would lead to realistic and effective solutions to diversity issues and underrepresentation which could be implemented efficiently.  It also suggests that demoralizing diversity issues and deemphasizing empathy would allow practical programs that make a difference to develop more effectively.  Finally, it suggests that the intention of words should mean more than how they are taken or understood by others who hear them spoken.  This, the memo claims, would allow individuals to express opinions without risking backlash from their peers, leaders, and subordinates within the company.

Danielle Brown, Google’s Vice President of Diversity, Integrity, and Governance, responded briefly to the memo with a company-wide email.  The email stresses that Google does not endorse the opinions expressed in the memo and that it is working hard to put into place programs to address diversity issues in technology.  It also states that it encourages discussion and the expression of opposing viewpoints in the workplace so long as the discussion stays within the boundaries laid out by Google’s Code of Conduct.


### Ethical Elements
It is likely that according to the legalist ethical framework that the domination of a single set of rules/biases ascribed to either the left or right political sides would be considered ethical. Though this is not what the writer is advocating for, having policies that lean completely left or right and enforcing those policies would be ethical according to legalist ethics. For example, the writer cites Google’s left bias as having created a “monoculture that maintains its hold by shaming dissenters into silence”. A legalist would praise this practice as one that correctly enforces a centralist attitude. Another example would be what the writer points out about discrimination to achieve perfect equality of representation. According to legalist ethics, Google’s top people have every right and obligation to enforce this authoritarian version of equality on the company.

### Unethical Elements
As outlined, legalistic ethics are, overall, decidedly in favor of Google’s overbearing practices. It follows then that legalistic ethics would find many of Damore’s prescriptions to remedy or remove these practices invalid. Beginning with Damore’s second suggestion, to “stop alienating conservatives,” it is clear that an organization that adheres to a legalist ethic would reject this in order to ensure that dissenting opinions aren’t able to gain traction and usurp the status quo. In the same vein, legalism would also not go along with Damore’s idea to “confront Google’s biases.” Next, Damore asks Google to “stop restricting programs and classes to certain genders or races.” However, such actions are valid under legalism. Thus, it is invalid for Damore, who is not someone who oversees the company’s operation or heading, to question these practices. In fact, such insubordination would be met with swift and harsh punishment under legalism (as it was). In summary, Damore’s advocacy for the open discussion of company practices and values is, contentwise, at odds with legalist thought, and, in itself, an act of insubordination, which is unethical according to legalism.   


## Gender Bias in Tech
### Summary
While there are more women today entering STEM fields, the percentage of female computer-and-information science majors has declined from about 37 percent in 1984 to 18 percent in 2017. There isn’t one specific reason why this decline has happened, but it can be hard for younger women majoring in a technology field to feel as though they belong. There is a lack of women professors at university and a lack of women with tech positions in the workforce. This can make it hard for younger women interested in computer science to find mentors and people to look up to. Not only is there a decline in female computer science majors, but women are choosing to drop out of tech for various reasons. These reasons include workplace conditions, a lack of access to creative roles, and a sense of feeling stalled in one’s careers. Another major factor for women choosing to drop out of tech is the undermining behavior that women experience from their managers. It seems that most women who work in tech will experience some form of bias or sexual harassment somewhere along the way. This alone could put off younger women that are thinking about majoring in computer science and other tech related areas which could play a part in that decline. 

### Legalist Response
The fundamental principle of Legalism is the good of the state, but we can expand its ideals to consider corporations as states. From this perspective, the only relevant concerns with respect to hiring practices are the bottom line and the potential for future income. Nothing is owed to the workers and women who are troubled by the gender imbalance should simply keep their heads down and work. This does not mean that a Legalist company cannot seek to balance its workforce composition, only that it need not do so in service of some conception of justice. Instead, a Legalist corporation that seeks to hire more women would do so because it believes that doing so would increase productivity or decrease costs. The decision to address or not address gender imbalance would be at the sole discretion of high-level company leadership. The judgement of the executives would not be subject to any sort of review, since their authority would be absolute. Furthermore, Legalism does not offer a clear answer to the problem of gender imbalance, only a framework from which the company should derive a decision. Thus, it is possible that the executives of different corporations could institute different policies based on conflicting views about what will strengthen a business. One policy that seems particularly consistent with the underpinnings of Legalism is total disinterest in the demographics of the workforce. Under Legalism, workers receive their tasks from superiors and are expected to perform them effectively and unquestioningly; thinking is left to leadership. In this system, diverse perspectives in the workforce do not have much use. A Legalist might even seek to minimize gender diversity, as uniformity could help minimize individualism. So long as the decision is made by executives with the goal of strengthening the company, it is consistent with Legalism.

## Race and Ethnicity Biases in Tech
### Summary
Diversity in tech fields has been an outstanding issue that continues to be a problem today. Many of the technology companies in Silicon Valley, including Facebook, Google, etc, were shown to make up no more than 1 percent of technical employees in 2016 according to the Bloomberg article. Looking at the demographics two years later, shows that there are still half as many African Americans and Hispanics in tech and that 83 percent of tech executives are white. These issues stem from the lack of effort in attracting underrepresented minorities and the lack of qualified people from these backgrounds for these positions. Since the students aren’t provided with the same programs, they are underqualified and this results in less students being exposed to technical fields and not be as competitive candidates. This can in turn cause less students of different races and ethnicities to apply and be hired by these companies causing other students of those background to feel isolated and excluded. These race and ethnicity issues continue to be a problem today and require much more work by both parties to fully address them despite the changes and initiatives taken in the last decade.

Sources:
- https://www.techrepublic.com/article/5-eye-opening-statistics-about-minorities-in-tech/


### Legalist Response
Since there is no legislation mandating diversity, there is no ethical issue with its absence under the legalist framework. Nor can foundational legal documents like the Constitution assist with interpreting this issue, since any interpretation including diversity would be generous with the source material, and legalism abhors any possibility of ambiguity. The general sentiment of legalism would be against promoting diversity; not necessarily because it is against legalistic practice, but simply because there is no good reason to expend the effort.  Improving education so that underrepresented minorities are offered the same opportunities is not a priority as long as the current system obeys legal practices and does not provide value for the people at the expense of an undue burden on the corporation or state. Promoting diversity may have benefits for corporations or the nation, but the reasons for it are largely social as well, an attempt to solve injustice. Legalism tends to ignore current social conditions and focus solely on legal issues, so diversity is beyond its scope.
